4202
rpA
41
]LC.sc[
1v53190.4042:viXra
Unveiling LLM Evaluation Focused on
∗
Metrics: Challenges and Solutions
Taojun Hu
Department of Biostatistics, Peking University
and
Xiao-Hua Zhou†
Department of Biostatistics, Peking University
Chongqing Big Data Research Institute, Peking University
Beijing International Center for Mathematical Research, Peking University
April 16, 2024
Abstract
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is witnessing a remarkable breakthrough
driven by the success of Large Language Models (LLMs). LLMs have gained sig-
nificant attention across academia and industry for their versatile applications in
text generation, question answering, and text summarization. As the landscape of
NLP evolves with an increasing number of domain-specific LLMs employing diverse
techniques and trained on various corpus, evaluating performance of these models
becomes paramount. To quantify the performance, it’s crucial to have a compre-
hensive grasp of existing metrics. Among the evaluation, metrics which quantifying
the performance of LLMs play a pivotal role. This paper offers a comprehensive ex-
ploration of LLM evaluation from a metrics perspective, providing insights into the
selection and interpretation of metrics currently in use. Our main goal is to elucidate
their mathematical formulations and statistical interpretations. We shed light on the
application of these metrics using recent Biomedical LLMs. Additionally, we offer
a succinct comparison of these metrics, aiding researchers in selecting appropriate
metrics for diverse tasks. The overarching goal is to furnish researchers with a prag-
matic guide for effective LLM evaluation and metric selection, thereby advancing the
understanding and application of these large language models.
Keywords: Largelanguagemodels; Evaluation; Statisticalinterpretations; Metrics; Biomed-
ical LLMs; Repositories
∗This research was funded by supported by National Key R&D Program of China (No.
2021YFF0901400)
†Correspondence author, azhou@math.pku.edu.cn
1

1 Introduction
ChatGPT, also namely GPT3.5, (Brown et al. 2020, Wang et al. 2022) has demonstrated
its remarkable ability to generate coherent sequences of words and engage in conversational
interactions. As the popularity of ChatGPT surged, quantities of large language models
(LLMs) emerged rapidly. Researchers not only explore distinct model architectures and
propose various fine-tuning methods to enhance LLM capabilities but also investigate ways
to tailor LLMs to specific domains.
LLMs present a significant opportunity for tasks such as generating scientific texts,
answering questions, and extracting core information from articles. For instance, amidst
the daily influx of over 3000 new articles in peer-reviewed journals (Sayers et al. 2023),
LLMs can swiftly extract key insights, aiding readers in navigating through vast amounts
of medical literature. Furthermore, LLMs can potentially analyze symptoms described by
patients to suggest diagnoses and treatment options, thus alleviating physicians’ workload
and improving patient care, which is a useful application in medicine. These applications
underscore two primary functionalities of LLMs: information retrieval and text genera-
tion. However, LLMs can also contribute to various other aspects of medical research and
applications. Due to these advantages, today’s LLMs are attracting increasing attention
across multiple fields. With the surge of novel LLMs, reviewing and evaluating existing
LLMs is of great importance. Among evaluations, the intrinsic statistical interpretations
are frequently neglected in current research and reviews.
The proliferation of LLMs has prompted the emergence of reviews aimed at provid-
ing insights into their development and potential applications. For instance, Naveed et al.
(2023)reviewed LLMsfrom2019, startingwithT5, uptothelatestreleases in2023, offering
comprehensive references and comparisons. Wang et al. (2023) highlighted the promising
2

applications of LLMs in addressing biomedical questions, while Chen et al. (2023) focused
onevaluatingbiomedicalLLMswithrespecttobenchmarksandsummarizationcapabilities.
While existing reviews generally discuss LLMstructures and applications, evaluating LLMs
is crucial for guiding their development and deployment but understudied. Evaluation en-
compasses various aspects, including downstream tasks, criteria, benchmark datasets, and
metrics. Although Chang et al. (2023) surveyed LLM evaluation, comprehensive summa-
rizing the metrics remains scarce. This work aims to fill this gap by providing a survey of
contemporary LLM evaluation metrics, along with mathematical formulations and statis-
tical explanations and practical guidance for implementation using open-source libraries.
Our paper shed lights on the bridge between the existing LLM evaluations and statistics
by exploring the statistical interpretations of the metrics. Additionally, we showcase how
these metrics have been utilized in conjunction with published biomedical LLMs through
illustrative examples. Our main contributions are four-folds:
•
Summarizing and categorizing the metrics for LLM evaluation into three distinct
types;
•
Providing mathematical formulations and statistical interpretations for each metric,
along with a comparative analysis to serve as a guide for LLM researchers;
•
Identifying repositories containing the discussed metrics;
•
Showcasing how these metrics and baseline datasets are applied in the evaluation of
recently developed biomedical LLMs, facilitating further studies to keep alignment
with previous models.
The article is structured as follows: Section 2 offers a concise overview of LLM evalua-
tion criteria. Section 3 details the most utilized metrics in LLM evaluations, including their
3

mathematical expressions and statistical interpretations, alongside a directory of reposito-
ries for implementing these metrics. Section 4 showcases the application of these metrics
using biomedical LLMs as case studies, including the baseline datasets employed for evalu-
ation. Section 5 discusses the pros and cons of the existing widely used metrics and stresses
two major common problems that are often ignored: the imperfect gold standard issue and
absent of statistical inference method. The paper concludes with Section 6, summarizing
our findings and the limitations for this paper.
2 Evaluations for LLMs
We provide a brief overview of evaluation criteria for LLMs, which, although not the main
focus of this paper, are essential for understanding critical development aspects of LLMs.
With NLP’s long history, models have been developed for specific tasks, either supervised
or unsupervised. Accuracy in generating a desired answer is a predominant focus in LLM
evaluations. However, issues such as overfitting and ignoring detrimental aspects like un-
fairness or hallucination render accuracy an imperfect evaluation metric. Hallucination,
gaining researchers’ attention recently, involves generating false or misleading information
by well-trained LLMs, often due to biases in training data, leading to overconfident and
inaccurate outputs. This overconfidence is closely linked to an overreliance on accuracy-
oriented training. To address these issues, it’s crucial to understand the key considerations
and criteria in LLM evaluation. We discuss these evaluation criteria from various perspec-
tives in this section.
Accuracy (Bengio et al. 2000, Morin & Bengio 2005) measures how well the LLM pro-
duces desired results, a primary performance concern. Typically, gold standard answers
4

are used, or specialists are employed to assess LLM performance. High accuracy ensures
optimal quality and unbiased predictions, aligning LLMs with user needs and instructions,
making it a fundamental requirement.
Ethicality (Weidinger et al.2021,Ganguli et al.2022,Jobin et al.2019)involvesabroad
range of concerns, including privacy protection, misinformation reduction, fairness, and
transparency. Given LLMs are trained on large datasets that may include sensitive infor-
mation or deceptive content, ethicality mandates LLMs to produce legal, safe, and ethical
outputs. Ongoing research, transparent practices, and thoughtful policy-making are essen-
tial for ensuring LLMs’ positive societal contributions.
Fairness (Bolukbasi et al.2016,Dixon et al.2018,Hovy & Yang2021,Selbst et al.2019),
a critical aspect of ethicality with significant social implications, demands equal treatment
from LLM outputs, regardless of individual or group demographics. It requires bias miti-
gation to prevent discriminatory decisions, highlighted by the need for fairness in pronoun
prediction in sentences like ” is a nurse,”. A fair system of LLMs is supposed to put
no preference on ”he” or ”she” that suggests the sex directly. The criterion of fairness
promotes unbiased system responses.
Generalization (Raffel et al. 2020, Hupkes et al. 2023, Lazaridou et al. 2021) indicates
an LLM’s ability to adapt to unseen data, crucial for responding to diverse queries and
understanding text generation mechanisms. Techniques like regularization and diverse
dataset training enhance generalization, which is key for LLMs to comprehend language
and context broadly.
5

Robustness (Wang et al. 2021, Goel et al. 2021, Goyal et al. 2023) describes an LLM’s
resilience to errors, manipulations, or adversarial attacks, aiming for trustworthy and con-
sistent outputs. Addressing this involves varied dataset training and adversarial methods
to ensure performance stability and real-world application trustworthiness.
Reasoning (Valmeekam et al.2022,Jin et al.2023), oranLLM’sabilitytologicallyinfer
or deduce information, is essential for applying learned knowledge to new contexts. This
capability, requiring further research, underscores the need for LLMs to exhibit logical and
causal reasoning.
Evaluating LLMs comprehensively requires examining not only accuracy but also ethi-
cality, fairness, generalization, robustness, and reasoning. Each aspect is vital for creating
intelligent LLMs that benefit society and users. Employing benchmark datasets is a com-
mon solution for comprehensive evaluation, with metric design playing a crucial role in
assessing LLM capabilities, which we explore further in the next section.
3 Metrics
The metrics can be broadly categorized into three types. The first type, which assesses
the ability to accurately classify texts into at least two labels, is the most prevalent. We
refer to these as the Multiple-Classification (MC) metrics. They can be applied
to various tasks with developed benchmark datasets. The second type, known as the
Token-Similarity (TS) metrics, evaluates how well the generated texts align with the
expected texts. Lastly, a metric specifically tailored for the Question-Answering task is
the Question-Answering (QA) metrics. In the following sections, we will provide a
detailed illustration of each metric along with its mathematical formulation. Meanwhile,
6

True/Prediction Positive Negative
Positive y (TP) y (FN)
11 10
Negative y (FN) y (TN)
01 00
Table 1: The contingency table for a two-label classification problem
we also explain for these metrics from a statistical perspective.
3.1 Multiple-Classification metrics
The Multiple-Classification (MC) metrics assess how effectively the LLM classifies texts
into multiple groups, with each group serving as a label. These metrics encompass Ac-
curacy (Acc), Recall (R), Precision (P), and F1 scores (Goutte & Gaussier 2005), partic-
ularly in two-label classification scenarios. In multi-label classification, the micro-F1 and
macro-F1 metrics (Ghamrawi & McCallum 2005) are commonly employed. To illustrate,
let’s consider a two-label problem, distinguishing between ”positive” and ”negative” cases.
Benchmark datasets provide the gold standard label for each case, while the LLM performs
×
classification and generates predictions. This process results in a 2 2 chart (Table 1), with
cells representing True Positive (TP), False Positive (FP), False Negative (FN), and True
Negative (TN) instances. Thus, Accuracy (Acc) can be expressed as:
TP +TN
Acc = (1)
TP +FN +FP +TN
The Recall, also known as Sensitivity or True Positive Rate, signifies the proportion of
positive detections among the actual ”positive” instances. It gauges an LLM’s ability to
identify positive instances. The formula for the Recall is given by:
TP
Recall = (2)
TP+FN
7

Precision, also referred to the Positive Predictive Value, indicates the proportion of
actual positive instances among all instances identified as positive. It measures an LLM’s
precisioninfilteringoutnegativeinstancesfalselylabeledaspositive. ThePrecisionformula
is:
TP
Precision = (3)
TP+FP
However, high Recall often corresponds to low Precision, and vice versa. The F1 score
balances these two metrics using a simple harmonic mean operation:
2×Recall×Precision
F1 = (4)
Recall+Precision
The F1 score ranges from 0 to 1, with F1= 1 indicating both perfect Recall and perfect
Precision.
From a statistical perspective, the aforementioned metrics carry inherent probabilis-
tic interpretations. Before delving into their statistical interpretations, it’s important to
briefly define the sample and population of these metrics, an aspect often overlooked by
researchers. The population for LLMs refers to the global corpus on which the models are
evaluated, while the sample comprises thetest datasets. Inmost cases, thetest datasets are
assumed to be randomly sampled from the global corpus, allowing the metrics computed
on them to represent the model’s performance on the global corpus.
Let’s consider the classification outcomes provided by the LLM denoted as X, and the
true labels as Y, both binary variables within {0,1}. The Accuracy metric represents
P(X = Y) = P(X = 1,Y = 1)+P(X = 0,Y = 0), while Recall denotes P(X = 1 | Y = 1)
and Precision denotes P(Y = 1 | X = 1). The F1-score means the harmonic mean of the
previous two metric, that is 2 . The Receiver Operating Character-
1/P(X=1|Y=1)+1/P(Y=1|X=1)
8

istic (ROC) curve, along with the Area Under the Curve (AUC), offers a comprehensive
assessment of a classifier or diagnostic tool. It illustrates all possible trade-offs between
sensitivity and specificity across various decision cut-offs. Similarly, the Precision-Recall
(PR) curve showcases the interplay between Precision and Recall under different cut-offs,
with Recall on the x-axis and Precision on the y-axis. The area under the Precision-Recall
curve (PRAUC) quantifies the classifier’s performance. Studies by Saito & Rehmsmeier
(2015) have demonstrated that PRAUC can provide more informative insights with im-
balanced datasets where the negatives far outnumber the positives. However, to esti-
mate AUC/PRAUC, a continuous biomarker for classification is necessary. Consequently,
AUC/PRAUC evaluation may not be directly applicable to LLMs lacking such continuous
biomarkers. Boththe AUC and PRAUC offer comprehensive evaluations for LLMs without
relying on specific cutoff values. Despite their potential advantages, many studies on LLMs
have not reported AUC/PRAUC results, even when continuous biomarkers are available.
This omission limits the comprehensiveness of evaluating LLM performance.
Inmulti-labelcases, wheretherearemorethantwolabels, theaccuracyandtwovariants
of the F1 score are widely used: micro-F1 and macro-F1. We illustrate the notations first.
Suppose there are L labels marked from 1 to L, then the number of instances that are
classified as label i by the LLM but belong to the label j is noted by y . We have an L×L
ij
matrix with elements (y ) . Then the simplest way to evaluate the LLM is the
ij 1≤i≤L, 1≤j≤L
accuracy, that is
L y
Acc = i=1 ii (5)
multi L L y
iP=1 j=1 ij
To overcome the multi-label confusion,PbothPthe macro-F1 score and micro-F1 score
treat each label separately as a single classification problem. For example, for the instances
9

which belong to the label i, the label i is regarded as the positive, and all the other labels
areregarded as the negative. In other words, the y is the true positive, y is the false
ii j6=i ij
P
positive, y is the false negative. The rest instances belong to the true negative. The
j6=i ji
P
micro-F1 harmonically averages the micro-precision and micro-recall. The micro-precision
is
Total TP L y
micro-precision = = i=1 ii (6)
Total TP+Total FP L
i=1
Py
ii
+ j6=iy
ij
While the micro-recall is P (cid:16) P (cid:17)
Total TP L y
micro-recall = = i=1 ii (7)
Total TP+Total FN L
i=1
Py
ii
+ j6=iy
ji
Then the micro-F1 is the harmonic mean of micro-Precall(cid:16)and mPicro-pre(cid:17)cision, that is
2×micro-recall×micro-precision
Micro−F1 = (8)
micro-recall+micro-precision
The macro-F1 evaluates the LLM in another way by averaging the class F1 for each
label. For label i, the class F1 can be calculated by
2 yii yii
F1 =
P (j6=i)yji+yii P j6=iyij+yii
(9)
i (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:16) (cid:17)
yii + yii
P (j6=i)yji+yii P j6=iyij+yii
Then the macro-F1 is (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
L
1
Macro-F1 = F1 (10)
i
L
i=1
X
The micro-F1 gives equal weight to each instance, which means it leans to the class
with more instances, while the macro-F1 gives equal weight to each class.
Fromastatisticalperspective, bothmicro-precisionandmicro-recallquantifytheproba-
bility that predicted labels exactly match the true labels, symbolized as P(X = Y). This is
10

equivalent to the multi-label accuracy, implying that these metrics essentially measure the
same aspect of model performance. The micro-F1 score, calculated as the harmonic mean
of micro-precision and micro-recall, similarly reflects P(X = Y). Consequently, micro-F1
does not offer a distinct advantage over accuracy in evaluating LLMs, as it essentially
conveys the same information. This analysis presupposes that the true label space is the
same with the classifier’s label space, sharing the same set of labels, as a common assump-
tion in LLM evaluations. Contrastingly, the macro-F1 score takes a different approach by
averaging the F1 scores of each class with equal weight, as denoted by the equation:
L
1 2
. (11)
L 1/P(X = i | Y = i)+1/P(Y = i | X = i)
i=1
X
Although this formula doesn’t directly translate to a simple probability expression, it ad-
dresses a critical limitation of accuracy metrics: their tendency to overlook classes with
fewer samples. This feature makes macro-F1 a preferred metric for evaluating LLMs, as it
ensures that all classes, regardless of size, are considered equally. The widespread adop-
tion of macro-F1 in LLM evaluations can be attributed to its ease of implementation and
its ability to facilitate comparisons with previously developed models. Despite these con-
siderations, more comprehensive evaluation methods, such as the ROC surface, remain
underutilized in LLM assessments. These metrics, which can offer a more nuanced under-
standing of model performance in multi-label problems, have yet to become standard in
the evaluation of LLMs.
3.2 Token-Similarity(TS) Metrics
Token-Similarity metrics encompass metrics that gauge the similarity between the texts
generated by LLMs and the reference texts. They are instrumental in assessing how well
LLMs can produce a desired sequence of words given contextual information. LLMs fre-
11

quently employ these metrics to evaluate the quality of generated texts and their impact
on tasks such as machine translation and text summarization. Key metrics in this category
include Perplexity, BLEU (Bilingual Evaluation Understudy), ROUGE (Recall-Oriented
Understudy for Gisting Evaluation)-1 or 2, ROUGE-L, and BertScore, METEOR (Metric
for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit Ordering). They primarily assess LLM perfor-
mance at the token level.
To narrow our focus, we omit the tokenization process performed by LLMs and assume
that the texts are already adequately tokenized. We proceed with the understanding that
the LLM generates texts as follows: Given the context {X }0 , where T represents the
−t t=T
total length of the context, the LLM predicts a sequence of tokens after this contextual
information. These contextual texts could be either the prompt or the original texts that
need to be summarized in LLMs. Let the predicted sequence of tokens by the LLM be
represented as {x }N . To assess the quality of the generated texts, benchmark datasets
i i=1
provide a reference sequence of tokens {y }M , which serves as the gold standard.
j j=1
LLMs assign probabilities to each token in the vocabulary and select tokens based
on specific criteria to compose the desired generated texts. We denote the probabilities
ˆ
assigned by the LLM as P(·). Perplexity, introduced by Brown et al. (1988), focuses on
measuring the occurrence probability of the reference sequence {y }M according to the
j j=1
LLM, formulated as:
Perplexity = 2− M1 PM j=1log 2Pˆ(yj), (12)
where Pˆ(y ) represents the probability assigned by the LLM to the j-th token in the
j
reference sequence.
From a statistical perspective, Perplexity is inversely proportional to the likelihood
12

function M Pˆ(y ), thus lower perplexity values indicate better performance by the LLM
j=1 j
Q
in predicting the data.
BLEU proposed by Papineni et al. (2001) evaluates the LLM based on n-grams. An
n-gram is a re-grouping of token-level sequences to measure the co-occurrences of tokens.
Given a sequence {x }N , an n-gram indicates subsequences of length n as,
i i=1
{(x , x ,··· , x )}N−n+1
i i+1 i+n−1 i=1
.
Two n-grams match if every element matches in the given order, i.e., x = y , x =
i j i+1
y , ··· , x = y . Then, the Precision between the generated texts {x }N and
j+1 i+n−1 j+n−1 i i=1
the reference texts {y }M at the n-gram level is given by:
j j=1
Precision = Number of matching n-grams
n Total number of n-grams in generated text
(13)
= Number of matching n-grams
N−n+1
Token-level matchingisaspecialcase, equivalent to1-grammatching. BLEUintroduces
a Brevity Penalty to penalize cases where the generated text is too short and only partially
matches the reference text, neglecting key information. The Brevity Penalty is:
Tokens in generated text N
Brevity Penalty(BP) = min 1, = min 1, (14)
Tokens in reference text M
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
The first type of BLEU employs the formula:
BLEU = BP×exp(log(Precision )) (15)
1
Another type combines precision for n-grams with orders 1-4:
13

4
1
BLEU = BP×exp logPrecision (16)
n
4
!
n=1
X
The BLEU also possesses its statistical meaning. We assume the event that a token
in the corpus to appear in the reference text is denoted by A , and to appear in the
1
generated text is denoted by B . Similarly, the events for the n-gram appearing in two
1
texts are denoted by A and B . Then the Precision within the BLEU in the first form
n n 1
denotes P(A ∩B | B ) and the BLEU is proportional to it. The second form of BLEU
1 1 1
is proportional to the 4 P(A ∩ B | B ). BLEU primarily emphasizes precision but
i=1 i i i
Q
overlooks evaluations of recall. LLMs may achieve high BLEU scores by capturing partial
information from the reference texts, even if failing to predict the entirety of the reference
texts accurately. This limitation makes BLEU less suitable for researchers who require
LLMs to capture all relevant information from the context and accurately predict the
reference texts.
Different from BLEU, ROUGE-n and ROUGE-L (Lin 2004) are n-gram level F1 scores.
ROUGE-n can be calculated as:
Precision-n = Number of matching n-grams
Total number of n-grams in generated text
= Number of matching n-grams
N−n+1
(17)
Recall-n = Number of matching n-grams
M−n+1
ROUGE-n =
2×Precision-n×Recall-n
Precision-n+Recall-n
The most common ROUGE-n metrics are ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-2. ROUGE-L ex-
tends ROUGE-n by focusing on finding the Longest Common Subsequence (LCS), denoted
as nLCS. ROUGE-L is calculated as the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall:
2× nLCS × nLCS
ROUGE-L = M N . (18)
nLCS + nLCS
M N
14

The ROUGE-n can be expressed as a realization for
2
,
1/P(A ∩B | B )+1/P(A ∩B | A )
n n n n n n
while the ROUGE-L can be similarly defined.
METEOR proposed by Banerjee & Lavie (2005) is a metric based on ROUGE but aims
to mitigate the effects of different word variants and synonymy issues. Initially, both the
reference texts and the generated texts are tokenized. Then, METEOR applies stemming
to reduce the words to their base form in both texts. The stemmed sequences are denoted
as {x′}N and y′ M . ROUGE is then applied to the stemmed sequences of texts, with
i i=1 j j=1
(cid:8) (cid:9)
ROUGE-1 being the most commonly used metric for METEOR. Upon ROUGE, METEOR
also introduces a penalty term to reward the LLM for generating sequences of tokens in
the same order as they appeared in the reference texts. The penalty is calculated based
on the number of chunks. Let {z }K represent the matched tokens ordered by their
k k=1
appearances in the generated texts. If a sequence of these tokens appears adjacently in
both the generated and reference texts, they are combined into a chunk. For example, if
the reference texts are ”It is a guide to action” and the generated texts are ”It is a guide
to directing the learners”, then the matched tokens include ”It”, ”is”, ”a”, ”guide”, and
”to”. However, since the combination ”It is a guide to” appears in both texts in the same
order, it is considered a chunk. The penalty is calculated as:
3
#chunks
Penalty = , (19)
#matched tokens
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where # denotes the number. In an extreme case where the generated texts exactly match
the reference texts, the number of chunks is only 1. A lower penalty indicates a better
match between the generated and reference texts. When there are no bi-grams or longer
15

matches, the number of chunks is equal to the number of matched tokens, suggesting the
Penalty increases to 1. METEOR combines ROUGE and the Penalty as follows:
METEOR = ROUGE-1(1−βPenalty), (20)
where β is selected as 0.5 by Banerjee & Lavie (2005). In the worst-case scenario where
there are no bi-grams or longer matches, METEOR’s performance can decrease to half of
that of ROUGE-1. Conversely, when there are mostly longer matches, METEOR closely
aligns with ROUGE-1. Unlike ROUGE, METEOR tackles issues related to synonymy and
word variants, prioritizing longer matches between the generated and reference texts.
BertScore proposed by Zhang et al. (2019) also measures token similarities but not
based on the matching of n-grams; instead, it relies on BERT (Devlin et al. 2018) pre-
trained embeddings. Initially, it loads the BERT embeddings. For each token in the
generated texts {x }N and the reference texts {y }M , the corresponding embeddings can
i i=1 j j=1
be found within the BERT embeddings, each represented as fixed-length vectors denoted
by {xe}N and ye M . These sequences of vectors are then zipped to a single vector
i i=1 j j=1
(cid:8) (cid:9)
representing the two texts. The usual approach is to element-wise average:
b b
N M
1 1
xe = xe, ye = ye. (21)
N i M j
i=1 j=1
X X
BertScore then calculatesbthe cosine sbimilarbity of these tbwo vectors as a measure of the
similarity between the reference texts and the generated texts:
xe ·ye
BertScore = . (22)
||xe||·||ye||
b b
The cosine similarity measures the angle between two vectors projected onto a multi-
b b
dimensional space, regardless of their size. It ranges from -1 to 1, with a higher value
indicating greater similarity between the generated and reference texts. It aids in gauging
16

the semantic similarities among documents, thus widely used in NLP. Given that cosine
similarity maps the similarity of two vectors to the space [−1,1], statistical methods de-
signed to measure correlation with high-dimensional random vectors can be applied. These
include Pearson’s correlation, Canonical Correlation (Borga 2001), Distance Correlation
(Sz´ekely & Rizzo 2013), and others.
METEOR and BertScore represent more complex evaluation metrics for LLMs com-
pared to those previously discussed. Their complexity arises from the reliance on external
linguistic information, making a straightforward statistical explanation challenging. Unlike
simpler metrics, METEOR and BertScore effectively address synonymy issues, offering a
significant advantage in evaluating LLMs for nuanced linguistic understanding. These met-
rics have thus become widely adopted in the assessment of LLMs. It is noteworthy that,
with the exception of perplexity, all metrics discussed in this section favor higher scores as
indicators of superior LLM performance.
3.3 Question-Answering(QA) Metrics
Different from general classification problems or text matching problems, the Question-
Answering taskis a special task thatinvolves fuzzy matching issues, making theapplication
of previous metrics not straightforward. The QA task requires the LLM to identify the
answer to a specific question given a contextual passage. The answer for this question is
usually located in the contextual passage, so the QA task is transformed to predict the
starting position and the ending position in the contextual passage, assuming the middle
part is the answer. This is a restricted double-task prediction problem. An LLM often
predicts the starting position and ending position separately and excludes combinations
that are unreasonable, such as when the predicted ending position is before the predicted
17

starting position. Among the remaining combinations, the LLM ranks them by the overall
predictionprobability forthestarting positionandending position. Supposethereareover-
all N questions, each with a contextual passage. For question i, the LLM places predictions
in order from the most likely one to the less likely one, denoted by (s , e ), (s ,e ), ···,
i1 i1 i2 i2
where s,e denotes the starting position and ending position located in the original text
respectively. Assume the gold standard answer is located in the passage with starting posi-
tion and ending position as (s , e ), where k is the rank of it among all predictions given
iki iki i
by the LLM. There are three most popular metrics for these QA tasks. Strict Accuracy
(SaCC) (Tsatsaronis et al. 2015) is the proportion of completely correct predictions:
#{k = 1}
i
SaCC = , (23)
N
here k = 1 means the optimal prediction ranking first among all the predictions is exactly
i
the gold standard answer.
Lenient Accuracy (LaCC) (Tsatsaronis et al. 2015) is a more relaxed metric that allows
partially correct predictions:
#{k ≤ 5}
i
LaCC = . (24)
N
With Lenient Accuracy, if the top-5 predictions contain the gold standard answer, it is
regarded as correct predictions.
Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) (Tsatsaronis et al. 2015) comprehensively evaluates the
LLM,consideringnotonlytheoptimalpredictionsbutalsosuboptimalpredictionsperfectly
matching the gold standard answer. It is the average of the reciprocal ranks of the correct
predictions:
N
1 1
MRR = . (25)
N k
i
i=1
X
18

Metrics Statistical interpretation
Accuracy P(X = Y)
Recall P(X = 1 | Y = 1)
Precision P(Y = 1 | X = 1)
F1-score 2/(1/P(X = 1 | Y = 1)+1/P(Y = 1 | X = 1))
Micro-F1 P(X = Y)
Macro-F1 1/L L 2/(1/P(X = i | Y = i)+1/P(Y = i | X = i))
i=1
P
Perplexity (Likelihood({y }M ))−1/M
i i=1
BLEU P(A ∩B | B )
1 1 1
ROUGE-n 2/(1/P(A ∩B | B )+1/P(A ∩B | A ))
n n n n n n
ROUGE-L 2/(1/P(A ∩B | B )+1/P(A ∩B | A ))
LCS LCS LCS LCS LCS LCS
METEOR
BertScore
SaCC P(R(S) = 1)
LaCC P(R(S) ≤ 5)
MRR E(1/R(S))
Table 2: Statistical interpretations for each metric
All the three metrics are highly related to the rank statistics. Assume the rank statis-
tics for the gold standard answer is R(S), then we have SaCC = P(R(S) = 1), LaCC =
P(R(S) <= 5), and MRR = E(1/R(S)), where E(·) denotes the expectation. We sum-
marize the statistical interpretations for all above metrics in Table 2.
So far, we have classified the most popular metrics used to evaluate the LLMs into
three categories: Multi-Classification, Token-Similarity, and Question-Answering metrics,
and introduced the mathematical formulations and statistical implications for each metric.
19

To facilitate researchers in applying these metrics, we list the existing packages or functions
for these methods in Python in Table 3. While there may be other metrics used to measure
the efficiency of LLMs, most of them are less popular compared to the above metrics, so
we did not provide their mathematical formulations. In the next section, we will showcase
their applications with recently published LLMs in biomedical and global fields.
4 Application of these metrics: examples with biomed-
ical LLMs
We highlight the use of metrics through recently developed biomedical LLMs, spanning a
broad spectrum from specialized biomedical to general corpora. The advent of pre-trained
biomedical LLMs enhances capabilities such as abstract summarization within biomedical
texts, specific question answering, and task completion relevant to medical contexts, like
associating treatments with symptoms or clinical histories. Our literature review spanned
databases like Google Scholar, PubMed, ArXiV, and ACM digital libraries, focusing on
works from 2018 onwards that significantly relate to biomedical LLMs using keywords
like ”Medical/Biomedical/Clinical/Radiology” and ”Large Language Model/Pre-trained
model”. Whilenot exhaustive, our selection isrepresentative, focusing onwidely referenced
works. We delineated applications of these metrics in biomedical LLMs, compiling training
and benchmark datasets, and outlined the tasks applicable to each LLM, aiding researchers
in benchmarking their models against the previous competitive LLMs.
We provide a concise listing of biomedical LLMs in the Supplementary Information B
due to the length of our paper, detailing their training datasets alongside the downstream
tasks mentioned in the paper for each model, showcasing their performance capabilities.
20

Classification Metrics Repositories or Python functions
Accuracy sklearn.metrics.accuracy score
Recall sklearn.metrics.recall score
Precision sklearn.metrics.precision score
Multi-Classification
F1-score sklearn.metrics.f1 score
Micro-F1 sklearn.metrics.f1 score(average=’micro’)
Macro-F1 sklearn.metrics.f1 score(average=’macro’)
Perplexity nltk.perplexity
BLEU nltk.translate.bleu score
ROUGE-n https://github.com/pltrdy/rouge
Token-Similarities
ROUGE-L https://github.com/pltrdy/rouge
nltk.translate.meteor score;
METEOR
https://github.com/mcjoshi/qgeval
BertScore https://github.com/Tiiiger/bertscore
SaCC Manual Implementation
Question-Answering LaCC Manual Implementation
MRR Manual Implementation
Table 3: Repositories or Python functions to realized the metrics
21

Before diving into these biomedical LLMs, we offer a concise overview of downstream tasks
in LLMs, which play an important role in evaluating the performance of the LLMs. We left
theoverview ofthedownstreamtasks intheSupplementary InformationA.Fromthelisting
of existing biomedical LLMs, the PubMed and PMC corpus emerge as the most frequently
utilized training datasets across the biomedical LLM landscape, reflecting their extensive
adoption for model training. We also found that most LLMs showcase their capabilities
across multiple downstream tasks but not a single one.
We further illustrate the application of various metrics in evaluating these biomedical
LLMs, as detailed in Table 4. A checkbox in the table indicates the utilization of a spe-
cific metric for evaluation in the corresponding LLM. Beyond the aforementioned metrics,
additional metrics are occasionally employed in some studies, though they represent a mi-
nor fraction of the papers reviewed. Among them, MC metrics are predominantly favored
acrossallthreecategoriesofmetricsduetotheirstraightforwardapplicabilitytoestablished
benchmark datasets. For TS metrics, ROUGE-n and ROUGE-L are the most commonly
used, acting as F1-scores at the token level between reference and generated texts. QA
metrics are often applied together. Despite being specifically designed for Question An-
swering tasks, there’s a noticeable trend towards employing MC metrics with redesigned
QA benchmarks as an alternative to QA-specific metrics. For instance, both BioInstruct
(Tran et al. 2023) and RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2021) include QA tasks in their evaluations
but rely solely on MC metrics and BERTScore. This preference for simpler MC metrics
facilitates alignment with other LLMs but might neglect the inherent challenges LLMs face
in fully comprehending human language and ensuring the fluency and comprehensibility of
generated text. Therefore, a comprehensive evaluation incorporating a broad spectrum of
metrics is advisable for a thorough assessment of an LLM’s capabilities.
22

BiomedicalLLMs Acc Recall Precision F1/macro-F1 BLEU ROUGE-1/2/L METEOR BERT-Score MRR SaCC LaCC Additional
BioBERT X X X X
BioGPT X X X X
BioLinkBERT X X
BioMedGPT X X X X
BioMegatron X X X X X X
ClinicalBERT X X X X
NEM,
DoT5 X X X X
cheXbert
ELECTRAMed X X X X X X
Pearson-
GatorTronGPT X X X
Correlation
MedPaLM X
MedPaLM2 X
PubMedBERT BLURB
SciBERT X
SciFive X
GenCompareSum X
RadBERT X X X
BioBERTsum X
BioBART X X X X X
KeBioSum X X X
Biolnstruct X X X X
BioRoBERTa X
RoBERTa X X
BioELMo X
Table 4: The metrics used in the published paper for each LLM
23

In addition to the metrics, we have also summarized the benchmark datasets employed
in these biomedical LLMs, which is left in the Supplementary Information C. Among all
the downstream tasks, NER, RE, QA and TS are the focal points for biomedical LLMs.
Datasetssuch asBC5CDR, NCBI Disease, MedNLI, andCHEMPROT arefrequently used,
each by more than five LLMs, indicating their widespread adoption for evaluating model
performance in these specific tasks.
5 Strengths and weakness on the metrics
The metrics in language model evaluations are categorized into Multiple-Classification
(MC), Token-Similarity (TS), and Question-Answering (QA) types. MC metrics, primarily
used in multiple classification tasks, are prevalent in assessing LLM performance. While
MC metrics offer simplicity and alignment in LLM evaluations, they depend heavily on
well-structured benchmark datasets with each subject assigned to a single label, assuming
perfect labeling. This reliance on perfect labeling presents inherent limitations: firstly,
creating such datasets demands significant resources; secondly, MC metrics struggle with
subjects having ambiguous or multiple labels, necessitating more advanced metrics; finally,
the assumption of perfect labeling overlooks the challenges of real-world data without
human-assigned labels, potentially impacting LLM performance and generalization.
Moreover, an interesting parallel exists between MC metrics and the metrics used in
diagnostic studies, particularly in their emphasis on sensitivity and specificity, along with
ROC/AUC analysis. While diagnostic studies might prioritize sensitivity and specificity,
LLM evaluations often focus on Recall and Precision, analogous to sensitivity and Posi-
tive Predictive Value (PPV), respectively. Challenges arise in the context of unbalanced
datasets, where a classifier could misleadingly show high performance metrics by over-
24

predicting the majority class. Supposing a dataset with only a few subjects labeled as
negative, an extreme classifier predicting all the subjects as positive would obtain both
high recall and precision, accordingly high F1-score. However, it is not a classifier that
should be preferred. Thus it highlights the inadequacy of using conventional metrics like
F1-score without considering the balance between classes or employing techniques like re-
sampling or weighted scores. The aforementioned example of imbalanced data underscores
the importance for researchers to meticulously select metrics tailored to the data structure.
Additionally, for LLMs predicting only the label, a thorough evaluation with the pair of
sensitivity/specificity and the pair of Recall/Prediction as well as the F1-score is recom-
mended. For LLMs predicting labels with continuous biomarkers, methods that are free
of the cut-off points can provide a more comprehensive assessment of model performance.
When dealing with binary labels, consideration of AUC/PRAUC is essential, while for
models with ordinal multiple labels, novel approaches such as ROC surface analysis are
preferred. However, these methods remain underexplored in the context of existing LLMs.
Additionally, the lack of an efficient selection threshold complicates the determination of
LLM performance adequacy, as F1-score lacks robust statistical properties. Addressing
these evaluation challenges necessitates the development of new metrics, possibly inspired
by diagnostic studies, to ensure statistical reliability in LLM assessments.
ComparedtoMCmetrics, TSmetricsassess thequalityofgeneratedtextsbycomparing
them with original texts or aligning the provided answers accordingly. Among TS metrics,
ROUGE-n and ROUGE-L (Lin 2004) are particularly prominent, effectively extending the
F1-score to evaluate token-level similarity between reference and generated texts. However,
these metrics assign equal importance to every token, not distinguishing between content-
criticalwords(nouns, verbs, adjectives) andlessimpactfulparticles, potentiallyskewing the
25

assessment of a text’s semantic quality. Additionally, ROUGE metrics struggle with word
variants and synonymy, making it challenging to capture the essence of longer texts com-
prehensively. Although METEOR (Banerjee & Lavie 2005) and BERTScore (Zhang et al.
2019) aim to address these issues, they heavily rely on external techniques or pre-defined
parameters. Exploring the development of more reliable metrics to evaluate token similar-
ities and conducting a comprehensive evaluation with various metrics for LLMs would be
intriguing.
QA metrics, tailored for Question Answering tasks, presume that answers reside within
the original texts, necessitating meticulous benchmark dataset design. Traditional QA
metrics, however, fall short in the era of abundant dialogue-based QA data, as they merely
assess an LLM’s ability to pinpoint answer boundaries within texts. Such metrics overlook
ambiguously correct responses, where slight variations in answer positioning might still
provide valid answers, underscoring the need for an automatic, versatile metric capable of
handling free-form dialogue-type QA data without the constraints of traditional evaluation
methods.
A major issue across all metric categories is imperfect labeling, known as an imperfect
gold standard, which signifies inaccuracies or unreliability in reference labels or texts used
for evaluation. Imperfect labeling manifests as misassigned labels in MC metrics, flawed
reference texts in TS metrics, and ambiguously correct responses in QA metrics. It may
stem from human error or the use of unverified techniques. While pre-trained LLMs like
GPT-4 are increasingly employed to generate gold standards, they may introduce hallu-
cinations, where LLMs may generate false or misleading information and the generated
results are not aligned with user requests. Sensitivity analysis and statistical adjustment
methods, primarily developed for diagnostic studies, offer solutions to mitigate bias arising
26

from imperfect gold standards. Umemneku Chikere et al. (2019) conducted a systematic
review of methods addressing imperfect gold standard bias in diagnostic studies. Studies
by Alonzo & Pepe (2005) andTo Duc et al. (2016) employ imputationmethods to mitigate
bias, while others like (Brenner 1996, Emerson et al. 2018, Albert 2009) assume access to
sensitivity and specificity information of the reference standard, leveraging it to adjust for
bias. Yet, these methods are underutilized in LLM research. Overlooking such bias may
lead researchers to draw incorrect conclusions. Borrowing ideas from correcting imperfect
gold standard bias could offer new insights for evaluations in LLMs.
Another issue, particularly concerning TS metrics, is the absence of statistical inference
methods. Most metrics solely provide a performance value for models without accompany-
ing confidence intervals to gauge the reliability of the estimate. The intricate structures of
texts may obscure the necessity of proposing statistical inference methods forthese metrics.
Nonetheless, this absence renders the metrics unreliable, as researchers cannot address the
uncertainty surrounding the models’ performance. A substantial variation may coincide
with high LLM performance; however, such models may prove unsuitable for real-world
applications.
6 Conclusions
Our study comprehensively reviews the most frequently utilized metrics in the evaluation
of LLMs, showcasing their application through recently published biomedical LLMs. We
aggregate benchmark datasets and downstream tasks associated with each LLM, marking
the first comprehensive summary of metrics, benchmark datasets, and their evaluations in
LLMs, complete with detailed mathematical formulations, statistical interpretations, and
repositories for these metrics. This study aims to guide researchers in biomedical or other
27

domain-specific/general LLMs in selecting appropriate benchmark datasets and evalua-
tion metrics, facilitating better evaluation of their LLMs and comparison with competing
models.
However, our study encounters several challenges. Firstly, while we encompass the most
commonevaluationmetrics foundinpublished literature, detailing every existing metric for
allpotentialusecasesisbeyondourscopeduetoitscomplexityandtheextensivemanpower
required. However, the metrics and recommendations we provide are representative and
valuable. Secondly, we do not directly correlate benchmark datasets with specific metrics
due to the flexibility in their application: a single dataset may be assessed using various
metrics, and different LLMs might employ different metrics even when using the same
dataset. Additionally, benchmark datasets may be adapted for particular tasks and metrics
depending on the researchers’ objectives. Thus, prescribing fixed metric usage for each
benchmark dataset is neither feasible nor advisable. Nevertheless, a future study offering
a comprehensive recommendation with detailed application scenarios would be of great
interest.
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by supported by National Key R&D Program of China (No.
2021YFF0901400) and Novo Nordisk A/S.
Conflict of Interest
The authors report there are no competing interests to declare.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
28

Title: Supplementary Information. (pdf)
References
(n.d.).
Abacha, A. B., Agichtein, E., Pinter, Y. & Demner-Fushman, D. (2017), Overview of the
medical question answering task at trec 2017 liveqa., in ‘TREC’, pp. 1–12.
Abacha, A. B. & Demner-Fushman, D. (2019), On the summarization of consumer health
questions, in ‘Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics’, pp. 2228–2234.
Abacha, A. B., Mrabet, Y., Sharp, M., Goodwin, T. R., Shooshan, S. E. & Demner-
Fushman, D. (2019), Bridging the gap between consumers’ medication questions and
trusted answers., in ‘MedInfo’, pp. 25–29.
Albert, P. S. (2009), ‘Estimating diagnostic accuracy of multiple binary tests with an
imperfect reference standard’, Statistics in medicine 28(5), 780–797.
Alonzo, T. A. & Pepe, M. S. (2005), ‘Assessing accuracy of a continuous screening test
in the presence of verification bias’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C:
Applied Statistics 54(1), 173–190.
Alsentzer, E., Murphy, J. R., Boag, W., Weng, W.-H., Jin, D., Naumann, T. &McDermott,
M. (2019), ‘Publicly availableclinical bert embeddings’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.03323
.
Banerjee, S. & Lavie, A. (2005), Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with
improved correlation with human judgments, in ‘Proceedings of the acl workshop on in-
29

trinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for machine translation and/or summarization’,
pp. 65–72.
Basaldella, M., Liu, F., Shareghi, E. & Collier, N. (2020), ‘Cometa: A corpus for medical
entity linking in the social media’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03295 .
Beltagy, I., Lo, K. & Cohan, A. (2019), ‘Scibert: A pretrained language model for scientific
text’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10676 .
Bengio, Y., Ducharme, R. & Vincent, P. (2000), ‘A neural probabilistic language model’,
Advances in neural information processing systems 13.
Bishop, J., Xie, Q. & Ananiadou, S. (2022), Gencomparesum: a hybrid unsupervised
summarizationmethodusingsalience, in‘Proceedingsofthe21stworkshoponbiomedical
language processing’, pp. 220–240.
Blagec, K., Dorffner, G., Moradi, M., Ott, S. & Samwald, M. (2022), ‘A global analysis of
metrics used for measuring performance in natural language processing’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.11574 .
Bolukbasi, T., Chang, K.-W., Zou, J. Y., Saligrama, V. & Kalai, A. T. (2016), ‘Man is
to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings’,
Advances in neural information processing systems 29.
Borga, M. (2001), ‘Canonical correlation: a tutorial’, On line tutorial http://people. imt.
liu. se/magnus/cca 4(5).
Bravo, A`., Pin˜ero, J., Queralt-Rosinach, N., Rautschka, M. & Furlong, L. I. (2015), ‘Ex-
traction of relations between genes and diseases from text and large-scale data analysis:
implications for translational research’, BMC bioinformatics 16, 1–17.
30

Brenner, H. (1996), ‘Correcting for exposure misclassification using an alloyed gold stan-
dard’, Epidemiology pp. 406–410.
Brown, P. F., Cocke, J., Della Pietra, S. A., Della Pietra, V. J., Jelinek, F., Mercer, R. L. &
Roossin, P. (1988), A statistical approach to language translation, in ‘Coling Budapest
1988 Volume 1: International Conference on Computational Linguistics’.
Brown, T., Mann,B., Ryder, N.,Subbiah, M., Kaplan,J.D.,Dhariwal, P.,Neelakantan, A.,
Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A. et al. (2020), ‘Language models are few-shot learners’,
Advances in neural information processing systems 33, 1877–1901.
Chang, Y., Wang, X., Wang, J., Wu, Y., Zhu, K., Chen, H., Yang, L., Yi, X., Wang, C.,
Wang, Y. et al. (2023), ‘A survey on evaluation of large language models’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.03109 .
Chen, Q., Du, J., Hu, Y., Keloth, V. K., Peng, X., Raja, K., Zhang, R., Lu, Z. & Xu, H.
(2023), ‘Large language models in biomedical natural language processing: benchmarks,
baselines, and recommendations’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16326 .
Cohan, A., Dernoncourt, F., Kim, D. S., Bui, T., Kim, S., Chang, W. & Goharian, N.
(2018), ‘A discourse-aware attention model for abstractive summarization of long docu-
ments’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.05685 .
Collier, N., Ohta, T., Tsuruoka, Y., Tateisi, Y.&Kim,J.-D.(2004),Introductiontothebio-
entity recognition task at jnlpba, in ‘Proceedings of the International Joint Workshop on
Natural Language Processing in Biomedicine and its Applications (NLPBA/BioNLP)’,
pp. 73–78.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. & Toutanova, K. (2018), ‘Bert: Pre-training of deep
31

bidirectional transformers for language understanding’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805
.
Dixon, L., Li, J., Sorensen, J., Thain, N.&Vasserman, L.(2018), Measuring andmitigating
unintendedbiasintextclassification, in‘Proceedingsofthe2018AAAI/ACMConference
on AI, Ethics, and Society’, pp. 67–73.
Do˘gan, R. I., Leaman, R. & Lu, Z. (2014), ‘Ncbi disease corpus: a resource for disease name
recognition and concept normalization’, Journal of biomedical informatics 47, 1–10.
Du, Y., Li, Q., Wang, L. & He, Y. (2020), ‘Biomedical-domain pre-trained language model
for extractive summarization’, Knowledge-Based Systems 199, 105964.
Emerson, S. C., Waikar, S. S., Fuentes, C., Bonventre, J. V. & Betensky, R. A. (2018),
‘Biomarker validation with an imperfect reference: Issues and bounds’, Statistical meth-
ods in medical research 27(10), 2933–2945.
Ganguli, D., Lovitt, L., Kernion, J., Askell, A., Bai, Y., Kadavath, S., Mann, B., Perez, E.,
Schiefer, N., Ndousse, K. et al. (2022), ‘Red teaming language models to reduce harms:
Methods, scaling behaviors, and lessons learned’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07858 .
Gerner, M., Nenadic, G. &Bergman, C. M. (2010), ‘Linnaeus: aspecies nameidentification
system for biomedical literature’, BMC bioinformatics 11(1), 1–17.
Ghamrawi, N. & McCallum, A. (2005), Collective multi-label classification, in ‘Proceedings
of the 14th ACM international conference on Information and knowledge management’,
pp. 195–200.
Goel, K., Rajani, N., Vig, J., Tan, S., Wu, J., Zheng, S., Xiong, C., Bansal, M. & R´e,
32

C. (2021), ‘Robustness gym: Unifying the nlp evaluation landscape’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.04840 .
Goutte, C. & Gaussier, E. (2005), A probabilistic interpretation of precision, recall and f-
score, with implication for evaluation, in ‘European conference on information retrieval’,
Springer, pp. 345–359.
Goyal, S., Doddapaneni, S., Khapra, M. M. & Ravindran, B. (2023), ‘A survey of adver-
sarial defenses and robustness in nlp’, ACM Computing Surveys 55(14s), 1–39.
Gu, Y., Tinn, R., Cheng, H., Lucas, M., Usuyama, N., Liu, X., Naumann, T., Gao, J.
& Poon, H. (2021), ‘Domain-specific language model pretraining for biomedical natu-
ral language processing’, ACM Transactions on Computing for Healthcare (HEALTH)
3(1), 1–23.
Gururangan, S., Marasovi´c, A., Swayamdipta, S., Lo, K., Beltagy, I., Downey, D. & Smith,
N. A. (2020), ‘Don’t stop pretraining: Adapt language models to domains and tasks’,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10964 .
Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Basart, S., Zou, A., Mazeika, M., Song, D. & Stein-
hardt, J. (2020), ‘Measuring massive multitask language understanding’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.03300 .
Herrero-Zazo, M., Segura-Bedmar, I., Mart´ınez, P. & Declerck, T. (2013), ‘The ddi cor-
pus: An annotated corpus with pharmacological substances and drug–drug interactions’,
Journal of biomedical informatics 46(5), 914–920.
Hou, Y., Xia, Y., Wu, L., Xie, S., Fan, Y., Zhu, J., Qin, T. & Liu, T.-Y. (2022), ‘Dis-
33

covering drug–target interaction knowledge from biomedical literature’, Bioinformatics
38(22), 5100–5107.
Hovy, D.&Yang, D.(2021),Theimportanceofmodeling socialfactorsoflanguage: Theory
and practice, in ‘Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of
theAssociationforComputationalLinguistics: HumanLanguageTechnologies’, pp. 588–
602.
Hupkes, D., Giulianelli, M., Dankers, V., Artetxe, M., Elazar, Y., Pimentel, T.,
Christodoulopoulos, C., Lasri, K., Saphra, N., Sinclair, A. et al.(2023), ‘Ataxonomyand
review of generalization research in nlp’, Nature Machine Intelligence 5(10), 1161–1174.
Jahan, I., Laskar, M. T. R., Peng, C. & Huang, J. (2023), ‘A comprehensive evaluation of
large language models on benchmark biomedical text processing tasks’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.04270 .
Jin, D., Pan, E., Oufattole, N., Weng, W.-H., Fang, H. & Szolovits, P. (2021), ‘What
disease does this patient have? a large-scale open domain question answering dataset
from medical exams’, Applied Sciences 11(14), 6421.
Jin, Q., Dhingra, B., Cohen, W. W. & Lu, X. (2019), ‘Probing biomedical embeddings
from language models’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.02181 .
Jin, Q., Dhingra, B., Liu, Z., Cohen, W. W. & Lu, X. (2019), ‘Pubmedqa: A dataset for
biomedical research question answering’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06146 .
Jin, Z., Chen, Y., Leeb, F., Gresele, L., Kamal, O., Zhiheng, L., Blin, K., Adauto, F. G.,
Kleiman-Weiner, M., Sachan, M. et al. (2023), Cladder: Assessing causal reasoning
34

in language models, in ‘Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems’.
Jobin, A., Ienca, M. & Vayena, E. (2019), ‘The global landscape of ai ethics guidelines’,
Nature machine intelligence 1(9), 389–399.
Ju, Z., Chakravorty, S., He, X., Chen, S., Yang, X. & Xie, P. (2020), ‘Coviddialog: Medical
dialogue datasets about covid-19’.
Karimi, S., Metke-Jimenez, A., Kemp, M. & Wang, C. (2015), ‘Cadec: A corpus of adverse
drug event annotations’, Journal of biomedical informatics 55, 73–81.
Kim, J.-D., Ohta, T., Tateisi, Y. & Tsujii, J. (2003), ‘Genia corpus—a semantically anno-
tated corpus for bio-textmining’, Bioinformatics 19(suppl 1), i180–i182.
Krallinger, M., Rabal, O., Akhondi, S. A., P´erez, M. P., Santamar´ıa, J., Rodr´ıguez, G. P.,
Tsatsaronis, G., Intxaurrondo, A., Lo´pez, J. A., Nandal, U. et al. (2017), Overview of the
biocreative vi chemical-protein interaction track, in‘Proceedings ofthesixth BioCreative
challenge evaluation workshop’, Vol. 1, pp. 141–146.
Krallinger, M., Rabal, O., Leitner, F., Vazquez, M., Salgado, D., Lu, Z., Leaman, R., Lu,
Y., Ji, D., Lowe, D. M. et al. (2015), ‘The chemdner corpus of chemicals and drugs and
its annotation principles’, Journal of cheminformatics 7(1), 1–17.
Krithara, A., Mork, J. G., Nentidis, A. & Paliouras, G. (2023), ‘The road from manual to
automatic semantic indexing of biomedical literature: a 10 years journey’, Frontiers in
Research Metrics and Analytics 8.
Krithara, A., Nentidis, A., Bougiatiotis, K. & Paliouras, G. (2023), ‘Bioasq-qa: Amanually
curated corpus for biomedical question answering’, Scientific Data 10(1), 170.
35

Lazaridou, A., Kuncoro, A., Gribovskaya, E., Agrawal, D., Liska, A., Terzi, T., Gimenez,
M., de Masson d’Autume, C., Kocisky, T., Ruder, S. et al. (2021), ‘Mind thegap: Assess-
ing temporal generalization in neural language models’, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 34, 29348–29363.
Lee, J., Yoon, W., Kim, S., Kim, D., Kim, S., So, C. H. & Kang, J. (2020), ‘Biobert:
a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text mining’,
Bioinformatics 36(4), 1234–1240.
Li, J., Sun, Y., Johnson, R. J., Sciaky, D., Wei, C.-H., Leaman, R., Davis, A. P., Mattingly,
C. J., Wiegers, T. C. & Lu, Z. (2016), ‘Biocreative v cdr task corpus: a resource for
chemical disease relation extraction’, Database 2016.
Limsopatham, N. & Collier, N. (2016), Normalising medical concepts in social media texts
by learning semantic representation, in ‘Proceedings of the 54th annual meeting of the
association for computational linguistics (volume 1: long papers)’, pp. 1014–1023.
Lin, C.-Y. (2004), Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries, in ‘Text
summarization branches out’, pp. 74–81.
Liu, F., Liu, Q., Bannur, S., P´erez-Garc´ıa, F., Usuyama, N., Zhang, S., Naumann, T., Nori,
A., Poon, H., Alvarez-Valle, J. et al. (2023a), ‘Compositional zero-shot domain transfer
with text-to-text models’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13386 .
Liu, F., Liu, Q., Bannur, S., P´erez-Garc´ıa, F., Usuyama, N., Zhang, S., Naumann, T., Nori,
A., Poon, H., Alvarez-Valle, J. et al. (2023b), ‘Compositional zero-shot domain transfer
with text-to-text models’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13386 .
Liu, Z., Lin, W., Shi, Y. & Zhao, J. (2021), A robustly optimized bert pre-training ap-
36

proach with post-training, in ‘China National Conference on Chinese Computational
Linguistics’, Springer, pp. 471–484.
Lo, K., Wang, L. L., Neumann, M., Kinney, R. & Weld, D. S. (2019), ‘S2orc: The semantic
scholar open research corpus’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02782 .
Luo, R., Sun, L., Xia, Y., Qin, T., Zhang, S., Poon, H. & Liu, T.-Y. (2022), ‘Biogpt:
generative pre-trained transformer for biomedical text generation and mining’, Briefings
in Bioinformatics 23(6), bbac409.
Luo, Y., Zhang, J., Fan, S., Yang, K., Wu, Y., Qiao, M. & Nie, Z. (2023), ‘Biomedgpt:
Open multimodal generative pre-trained transformer for biomedicine’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.09442 .
Miolo, G., Mantoan, G. & Orsenigo, C. (2021a), ‘Electramed: a new pre-trained language
representation model for biomedical nlp’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09585 .
Miolo, G., Mantoan, G. & Orsenigo, C. (2021b), ‘Electramed: a new pre-trained language
representation model for biomedical nlp’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09585 .
Mohan, S. & Li, D. (2019), ‘Medmentions: A large biomedical corpus annotated with umls
concepts’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.09476 .
Morin, F. & Bengio, Y. (2005), Hierarchical probabilistic neural network language model,
in ‘International workshop on artificial intelligence and statistics’, PMLR, pp. 246–252.
Naveed, H., Khan, A. U., Qiu, S., Saqib, M., Anwar, S., Usman, M., Barnes, N. &
Mian, A. (2023), ‘A comprehensive overview of large language models’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.06435 .
37

Nye, B., Li, J. J., Patel, R., Yang, Y., Marshall, I. J., Nenkova, A. & Wallace, B. C. (2018),
A corpus with multi-level annotations of patients, interventions and outcomes to support
language processing for medical literature, in ‘Proceedings of the conference. Association
for Computational Linguistics. Meeting’, Vol. 2018, NIH Public Access, p. 197.
Pafilis, E., Frankild, S. P., Fanini, L., Faulwetter, S., Pavloudi, C., Vasileiadou, A., Ar-
vanitidis, C. & Jensen, L. J. (2013), ‘The species and organisms resources for fast and
accurate identification of taxonomic names in text’, PloS one 8(6), e65390.
Pal, A., Umapathi, L. K. & Sankarasubbu, M. (2022), Medmcqa: A large-scale multi-
subject multi-choice dataset for medical domain question answering, in ‘Conference on
Health, Inference, and Learning’, PMLR, pp. 248–260.
Pampari, A., Raghavan, P., Liang, J.&Peng, J.(2018), ‘emrqa: Alargecorpusforquestion
answering on electronic medical records’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00732 .
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T. & Zhu, W. (2001), ‘A method for automatic evaluation
of machine translation”’, the Proceedings of ACL-2002, ACL, Philadelphia, PA, July
2002 .
Phan, L. N., Anibal, J. T., Tran, H., Chanana, S., Bahadroglu, E., Peltekian, A. & Altan-
Bonnet, G. (2021), ‘Scifive: a text-to-text transformer model for biomedical literature’,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03598 .
Poon, H., Naumann, T., Zhang, S. & Gonz´alez Hern´andez, J. (2023), Precision health in
the age of large language models, in ‘Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining’, pp. 5825–5826.
Pradhan, S., Elhadad, N., South, B. R., Martinez, D., Christensen, L. M., Vogel, A.,
38

Suominen, H., Chapman, W. W. & Savova, G. K. (2013), ‘Task 1: Share/clef ehealth
evaluation lab 2013.’, CLEF (working notes) 1179.
Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y., Li, W.
& Liu, P. J. (2020), ‘Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
transformer’, The Journal of Machine Learning Research 21(1), 5485–5551.
Rajpurkar, P., Jia, R. & Liang, P. (2018), ‘Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable
questions for squad’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03822 .
Rajpurkar, P., Zhang, J., Lopyrev, K. & Liang, P. (2016), ‘Squad: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05250 .
Romanov, A. & Shivade, C. (2018), ‘Lessons from natural language inference in the clinical
domain’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.06752 .
Saito, T. & Rehmsmeier, M. (2015), ‘The precision-recall plot is more informative than
the roc plot when evaluating binary classifiers on imbalanced datasets’, PloS one
10(3), e0118432.
Savery, M., Abacha, A. B., Gayen, S. & Demner-Fushman, D. (2020), ‘Question-driven
summarization of answers to consumer health questions’, Scientific Data 7(1), 322.
Sayers, E. W., Bolton, E. E., Brister, J. R., Canese, K., Chan, J., Comeau, D. C., Far-
rell, C. M., Feldgarden, M., Fine, A. M., Funk, K. et al. (2023), ‘Database resources
of the national center for biotechnology information in 2023’, Nucleic acids research
51(D1), D29–D38.
Selbst, A. D., Boyd, D., Friedler, S. A., Venkatasubramanian, S. & Vertesi, J. (2019),
39

Fairness and abstraction in sociotechnical systems, in ‘Proceedings of the conference on
fairness, accountability, and transparency’, pp. 59–68.
Shin, H.-C., Zhang, Y., Bakhturina, E., Puri, R., Patwary, M., Shoeybi, M. & Mani,
R. (2020), ‘Biomegatron: Larger biomedical domain language model’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.06060 .
Singhal, K., Azizi, S., Tu, T., Mahdavi, S. S., Wei, J., Chung, H. W., Scales, N., Tanwani,
A., Cole-Lewis, H., Pfohl, S. et al. (2022a), ‘Large language models encode clinical
knowledge’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.13138 .
Singhal, K., Azizi, S., Tu, T., Mahdavi, S. S., Wei, J., Chung, H. W., Scales, N., Tan-
wani, A., Cole-Lewis, H., Pfohl, S. et al. (2022b), ‘Large language models encode clinical
knowledge’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.13138 .
Singhal, K., Tu, T., Gottweis, J., Sayres, R., Wulczyn, E., Hou, L., Clark, K., Pfohl, S.,
Cole-Lewis, H., Neal, D. et al. (2023), ‘Towards expert-level medical question answering
with large language models’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09617 .
Smith, L., Tanabe, L. K., Ando, R. J. n., Kuo, C.-J., Chung, I.-F., Hsu, C.-N., Lin, Y.-S.,
Klinger, R., Friedrich, C. M., Ganchev, K. et al. (2008), ‘Overview of biocreative ii gene
mention recognition’, Genome biology 9, 1–19.
So˘gancıog˘lu, G., O¨ztu¨rk, H. & O¨zgu¨r, A. (2017), ‘Biosses: a semantic sentence similarity
estimation system for the biomedical domain’, Bioinformatics 33(14), i49–i58.
Srivastava, A., Rastogi, A., Rao, A., Shoeb, A. A. M., Abid, A., Fisch, A., Brown,
A. R., Santoro, A., Gupta, A., Garriga-Alonso, A. et al. (2022), ‘Beyond the imita-
40

tion game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models’, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2206.04615 .
Stubbs, A., Kotfila, C. & Uzuner, O¨. (2015), ‘Automated systems for the de-identification
of longitudinal clinical narratives: Overview of 2014 i2b2/uthealth shared task track 1’,
Journal of biomedical informatics 58, S11–S19.
¨
Stubbs, A. & Uzuner, O. (2015), ‘Annotating longitudinal clinical narratives for de-
identification: The 2014 i2b2/uthealth corpus’, Journal of biomedical informatics
58, S20–S29.
Sun, W.,Rumshisky, A.&Uzuner, O.(2013a),‘Annotatingtemporalinformationinclinical
narratives’, Journal of biomedical informatics 46, S5–S12.
Sun, W., Rumshisky, A. & Uzuner, O. (2013b), ‘Evaluating temporal relations in clinical
text: 2012 i2b2 challenge’, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
20(5), 806–813.
Sz´ekely, G. J. & Rizzo, M. L. (2013), ‘The distance correlation t-test of independence in
high dimension’, Journal of Multivariate Analysis 117, 193–213.
To Duc, K., Chiogna, M. & Adimari, G. (2016), ‘Bias–corrected methods for estimating
the receiver operating characteristic surface of continuous diagnostic tests’.
Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.-A., Lacroix, T., Rozi`ere,
B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F.et al. (2023), ‘Llama: Openandefficient foundation
language models’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 .
Tran, H., Yang, Z., Yao, Z. & Yu, H. (2023), ‘Bioinstruct: Instruction tuning of
41

large language models for biomedical natural language processing’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.19975 .
Tsatsaronis, G., Balikas, G., Malakasiotis, P., Partalas, I., Zschunke, M., Alvers, M. R.,
Weissenborn, D., Krithara, A., Petridis, S., Polychronopoulos, D. et al. (2015), ‘An
overview of the bioasq large-scale biomedical semantic indexing and question answering
competition’, BMC bioinformatics 16(1), 1–28.
Umemneku Chikere, C. M., Wilson, K., Graziadio, S., Vale, L. & Allen, A. J. (2019), ‘Diag-
nostictest evaluationmethodology: asystematic reviewofmethodsemployed toevaluate
diagnostic tests in the absence of gold standard–an update’, PLoS One 14(10), e0223832.
¨
Uzuner, O., Luo, Y. & Szolovits, P. (2007), ‘Evaluating the state-of-the-art in automatic
de-identification’, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 14(5), 550–
563.
Uzuner, O¨., South, B. R., Shen, S. & DuVall, S. L. (2011), ‘2010 i2b2/va challenge on
concepts, assertions, and relations in clinical text’, Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association 18(5), 552–556.
Valmeekam, K., Olmo, A., Sreedharan, S. & Kambhampati, S. (2022), ‘Large language
models still can’t plan (a benchmark for llms on planning and reasoning about change)’,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10498 .
Van Mulligen, E. M., Fourrier-Reglat, A., Gurwitz, D., Molokhia, M., Nieto, A., Trifiro,
G., Kors, J. A. & Furlong, L. I. (2012), ‘The eu-adr corpus: annotated drugs, diseases,
targets, and their relationships’, Journal of biomedical informatics 45(5), 879–884.
Wang, B., Xie, Q., Pei, J., Chen, Z., Tiwari, P., Li, Z. & Fu, J. (2023), ‘Pre-trained
42

language models in biomedical domain: A systematic survey’, ACM Computing Surveys
56(3), 1–52.
Wang, L. L., Lo, K., Chandrasekhar, Y., Reas, R., Yang, J., Burdick, D., Eide, D., Funk,
K., Katsis, Y., Kinney, R. et al. (2020), ‘Cord-19: The covid-19 open research dataset’,
ArXiv .
Wang, X., Wang, H. & Yang, D. (2021), ‘Measure and improve robustness in nlp models:
A survey’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08313 .
Wang, Y., Afzal, N., Fu, S., Wang, L., Shen, F., Rastegar-Mojarad, M. & Liu, H. (2020),
‘Medsts: a resource for clinical semantic textual similarity’, Language Resources and
Evaluation 54, 57–72.
Wang, Y., Kordi, Y., Mishra, S., Liu, A., Smith, N. A., Khashabi, D. & Hajishirzi, H.
(2022), ‘Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self generated instructions’, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.10560 .
Weidinger, L., Mellor, J., Rauh, M., Griffin, C., Uesato, J., Huang, P.-S., Cheng, M.,
Glaese, M., Balle, B., Kasirzadeh, A. et al. (2021), ‘Ethical and social risks of harm from
language models’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04359 .
Wu, C., Zhang, X., Zhang, Y., Wang, Y. & Xie, W. (2023), ‘Pmc-llama: Further finetuning
llama on medical papers’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14454 .
Xie, Q., Bishop, J. A., Tiwari, P. & Ananiadou, S. (2022), ‘Pre-trained language mod-
els with domain knowledge for biomedical extractive summarization’, Knowledge-Based
Systems 252, 109460.
43

Xu, G., Rong, W., Wang, Y., Ouyang, Y. & Xiong, Z. (2021), ‘External features enriched
model for biomedical question answering’, BMC bioinformatics 22(1), 272.
Yan, A., McAuley, J., Lu, X., Du, J., Chang, E. Y., Gentili, A. & Hsu, C.-N. (2022), ‘Rad-
bert: Adapting transformer-based language models to radiology’, Radiology: Artificial
Intelligence 4(4), e210258.
Yang, X., Bian, J., Fang, R., Bjarnadottir, R. I., Hogan, W. R. & Wu, Y. (2020), ‘Iden-
tifying relations of medications with adverse drug events using recurrent convolutional
neural networks and gradient boosting’, Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association 27(1), 65–72.
Yasunaga, M., Leskovec, J. & Liang, P. (2022), ‘Linkbert: Pretraining language models
with document links’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15827 .
Yuan, H., Yuan, Z., Gan, R., Zhang, J., Xie, Y. & Yu, S. (2022), ‘Biobart: Pretraining and
evaluation of a biomedical generative language model’, arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03905
.
Zeng, A., Liu, X., Du, Z., Wang, Z., Lai, H., Ding, M., Yang, Z., Xu, Y., Zheng, W.,
Xia, X. et al. (2022), ‘Glm-130b: An open bilingual pre-trained model’, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.02414 .
Zeng, G., Yang, W., Ju, Z., Yang, Y., Wang, S., Zhang, R., Zhou, M., Zeng, J., Dong,
X., Zhang, R. et al. (2020), Meddialog: Large-scale medical dialogue datasets, in ‘Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP)’, pp. 9241–9250.
44

Zhang, T., Kishore, V., Wu, F., Weinberger, K. Q. & Artzi, Y. (2019), ‘Bertscore: Evalu-
ating text generation with bert’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675 .
45