JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 1
Model Compression and Efficient Inference for
Large Language Models: A Survey
Wenxiao Wang†, Wei Chen†, Yicong Luo†, Yongliu Long†, Zhengkai Lin†, Liye Zhang†, Binbin Lin, Deng
Cai, Xiaofei He Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Transformerbasedlargelanguagemodelshaveachievedtremendoussuccess.However,thesignificantmemoryand
computationalcostsincurredduringtheinferenceprocessmakeitchallengingtodeploylargemodelsonresource-constrained
devices.Inthispaper,weinvestigatecompressionandefficientinferencemethodsforlargelanguagemodelsfromanalgorithmic
perspective.Regardingtaxonomy,similartosmallermodels,compressionandaccelerationalgorithmsforlargelanguagemodelscan
stillbecategorizedintoquantization,pruning,distillation,compactarchitecturedesign,dynamicnetworks.However,Largelanguage
modelshavetwoprominentcharacteristicscomparedtosmallermodels:(1)Mostofcompressionalgorithmsrequirefinetuningoreven
retrainingthemodelaftercompression.Themostnotableaspectoflargemodelsistheveryhighcostassociatedwithmodelfinetuning
ortraining.Therefore,manyalgorithmsforlargemodels,suchasquantizationandpruning,starttoexploretuning-freealgorithms.(2)
Largemodelsemphasizeversatilityandgeneralizationratherthanperformanceonasingletask.Hence,manyalgorithms,suchas
knowledgedistillation,focusonhowtopreservingtheirversatilityandgeneralizationaftercompression.Sincethesetwocharacteristics
werenotverypronouncedinearlylargemodels,wefurtherdistinguishlargelanguagemodelsintomediummodelsand“real”large
models.Additionally,wealsoprovideanintroductiontosomematureframeworksforefficientinferenceoflargemodels,whichcan
supportbasiccompressionoraccelerationalgorithms,greatlyfacilitatingmodeldeploymentforusers.
IndexTerms—Largelanguagemodels,modelcompression,efficientinference,quantization,pruning,knowledgedistillation,compact
architecturedesign,dynamicnetworks.
✦
1 INTRODUCTION computationalcostofthemodelintheinferenceprocess,so
thatthemodelcanrunonvariousresource-constrainedde-
LARGE language models (LLMs) has become an im-
vices. Algorithmically, common model compression meth-
portant and popular topic in the artificial intelligence
odsinclude:
field.Comparedwithpreviouslanguagemodels,LLMs(e.g.,
ChatGPT, LLaMA, Claude) show much greater generaliza- • Quantization transforms float32 weights or activa-
tioncapabilityfortheirunseendata.Furthermore,theyeven tionsintolower-bitfloatorintegernumbers.Lessbits
present many abilities that smaller models do not present means less memory requirement. Further, less bits
(i.e.,emergentabilities),suchasmulti-stepreasoningandin- may indicate higher parallelism and faster inference
struction following abilities. These progresses demonstrate speed.
greatpotentialsofLLMs. • Pruning devotes to removing unimportant compo-
However, the forbidding memory and computational nents (e.g., neurons, layers, etc) in a pre-designed
budgets in the inference process also prevent the deploy- model, thus reducing the memory and computa-
ment of LLMs. For example, a 10B models with float32 tionalcostintheinferencecost.
weightsconsumes37GBmemory,needlesstosaythatthein- • Knowledge distillation introduces a pretrained
ferencememorycostwillfurtherincreaseinaspeedsquare largemodelasateacherandtransfersitsknowledge
to the sequence length. To deploy the models on resource to a new smaller model which is called a student
constrained devices, or even mobile devices, many LLMs model.Then,thesmallermodelwillsharenearlythe
resort to model compression methods such as quantization same ability as the teacher and enjoy less memory
toreducetheinferencememoryandcomputationalcost. andcomputationalcost.
Model compression for deep learning models is a field • Compactarchitecturedesigndesignsnewoperators
that appear much earlier than LLMs. It assumes that we with less cost to replace (often approximate) the
have already a pre-defined (or even pretrained) model. cumbersome operators in the original model. For
Model compression devotes to reducing the memory and theTransformermodels,self-attentionsarethemain
targetsandareoftenreplacedwithotheroperators.
• †indicatesequalcontributionswithspecific. • Dynamic networks treat each inference sample dif-
• WenxiaoWang,YicongLuo,YongliuLong,andBinbinLinarewiththe ferently. The original model is a super-net, and each
SchoolofSoftwareTechnology,ZhejiangUniversity. sample only selects a sub-structure of the super-net
• LiyeZhangiswithSchoolofMathematicalSciences,ZhejiangUniversity. for inference. Mixture of experts (MoE) is a kind of
• WeiChen,ZhengkaiLin,DengCai,andXiaofeiHearewithStateKey
dynamicinference.
LabofCAD&CG,ZhejiangUniversity.
ManuscriptreleasedinFebruary10,2024. Besides, the above methods can also be combined for
4202
beF
51
]LC.sc[
1v84790.2042:viXra

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 2
further compression and speedup. Existing compression
methods have provided us with important cornerstones
andinsightstocompressLLMs.However,LLMsalsobring
manynewchallengesformodelcompression:
1) Many previous model compression methods of-
ten require to finetuning models after compres-
sion.However,sincethegreatbudgettofinetuning
LLMs, researchers have to explore finetuning free
or,atleast,moreefficientfinetuningmethods.
2) Instead of handling one single task such as neural
machine translation, large language models emph-
size versatility and generalization across various
tasks and unseen data, or even emergent abilities.
Thus, large language models after compression re-
quiremorecarefulvalidationoftheirversatilityand
generalization.
To face these challenges, many compression methods
specialized for LLMs are proposed. In this paper, we will
giveacomprehensivesurveyaboutthesemethods.Tobetter
present these methods, we further isolate language models
around one billion or less parameters, such as BERT, GPT-
2, and call them medium models, though they are usually
Fig.1:TheTransformerarchitecturedrawnfrom [1].
taken as large language models. And Models with over
one billion parameters, such as LLaMA, Claude, ChatGPT,
and etc, keep the name of large language models. The
the query with the corresponding key. The most common
reasonsisthatmediummodelsarelessaffectedbytheabove
attentionmoduleisscaleddot-productfunction:
two challenges, i.e., medium models are relatively easy to
finetune, demonstrate fewer emergent abilities. As a result, QKT
Attention(Q,K,V)=softmax( √ )V, (1)
many compression methods for medium models are still d
k
similartothoseforsmallermodels.
The following sections are organized as: Some prelimi-
where the weig√ht is computed through the dot-product of
narieswillbeintroducedinSection2.Then,wewilldiscuss QandK,and d k isaconstantscalingfactor.
Multi-head Attention. Further, instead of performing
pruning, knowledge distillation, quantization, compact ar-
a single attention function with keys, values and queries,
chitecture design and dynamic networks in Section 3, 4, 5,
Transformeremploysamulti-headattention[1],asshownin
6,7,8,respectively.
Fig.1.Itmapsinputtokensintohdistinctqueries,keysand
values ({Q i,K i,V i|i ∈ [1,h]}) with different linear layers.
Then,thefinaloutputbecomes:
2 PRELIMINARIES
Muti-HeadAttention=Concat(head ,··· ,head )W
1 h o
Inthissection,wewillintroducesomeessentialpreliminar-
head =Attention(Q ,K ,V ),
ies about Transformer, large language models, parameter- i i i i
(2)
efficienttraining,andetc.
whereW o isalinearprojectionmatrix.
Encoder and docoder. The first intial Transformer is
forneuralmachinetranslation,whichemploysanencoder-
2.1 Transformer
decoder structure. The encoder first handles input sequnce
Transformer is first introduced in [1], which is employed (e.g.,wirtteninthesourcelanguage)independently,andthe
formachinetranslationinitially.Itsfundamentalstructureis decodertakestheencoder’soutputasinputandpredictsthe
depicted in Fig. 1. The input (a sentence) is often projected final output (e.g., the target language). There are two core
throughanembeddinglayertoasequenceofvectors(called differencesbetweenanencoder’sandadecoder’sattention
tokens) for a Transformer’s input. Each Transformer block module: (1) The encoder employs a full attention, where
consistsofanattentionmoduleandamulti-layerpreceptron any two tokens in the input sequence are visible to each
(MLP)module. other. On the other hand, the decoder employs a single-
Attention.Foreachtokenintheinputsequence,itisfirst directionattention.Thereasonisthedecodergeneratesout-
mapped(oftenwithalinearfunction)intovectorsofquery puttokensonebyone,andeachtokencanonlyseenoutput
(Q) and/or key-value pairs (K and V). Then, the attention tokensbeforeitself.(2)Theencoderemploysaself-attention
module can be described as mapping a query and a set of module, that is, Q,K,V are all from input tokens of the
key-value pairs to an output. The output is computed as source language. In contrast, the decoder employs a cross-
a weighted sum of the values, where the weight assigned attention,whereK,V arefromtheencoder’soutput,while
to each value is computed by a compatibility function of Qislastoutputtokenofthedecoder.Asthedevelopment,in

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 3
additiontotheencoder-decodermodels(e.g.,T5[2]),plenty improve inference speed for LLMs, especially on hardware
of following language models also employ pure encoder with support for fast operation of low-bit datatypes (e.g.,
structure (e.g., BERT [3]) and pure decoder structure such INT4). It should be noted that quantization has achieved
asGPT-series[4],[5],[6]models. impressivesuccessinbothneuralnetworktraining[20]and
While we brifly introduce some important concepts in inference,whilethefocusofthissurveyisonlytheinference
Transformer,moresubtleintroductioncanbeseeninmany part.
previoussurveys[7],[8]. Quantization methods have several advantages over
other compression methods, such as pruning and distilla-
tion. 1) High compression ratio: quantizing the weights in
2.2 Medium/LargeLanguageModels
LLMs from 32-bit float to 4-bit integer could drastically
As the success of Transformer, more and more pure Trans-
compressthemodelsizetoapproximately1/8,essentialfor
former based language models emerge, and the parame- memory-bound1 processes like LLM inference. 2) Low cost:
ters of models also increase. Though there is no specific
abunchofquantizationmethodsdoesn’trequirere-training
threshold for large language models’ scale of parameter, it
the entire LLMs, making it more affordable to researchers
is commonly accepted that “large” language models can
withlimitedcomputingresources.3)Highflexibility:quanti-
be dated back from BERT [3] and GPT-1 [4], which are
zationiscompatiblewithmostothercompressionmethods,
bothproposedin2018.Theirscalesofparameterbothreach
which introduces exceptional opportunities for further im-
severalhundredmillion.
provingtheperformance.
After that, more language models such as GPT-3 [9],
Tohelpreadersbetterunderstandquantizationmethods,
PanGu [10], T5 [2], CPM-2 [11], BLOOM [12], OPT [13],
we will first introduce the standard quantization method
GLM[14],PaLM[15],QWen[16],ERNIE[17],LLaMA[18],
andsomebasicconceptsinSubsection3.1.Then,inSection
and etcare proposed. Besides scale of parameter, the most
3.2, we will briefly summarize some of the most important
significant property that distinguish these models from the
works for medium-size Language models (e.g., BERT, GPT-
previous are their emergence. As proposed in [19], large
2, etc.) before the emergence of LLMs. Section 3.3 and
languagemodelsutilizelarge-scaleself-supervisedpretrain-
Section3.4coversrecentadvancesinquantizationmethods
ingtoenablethemodelswithmanyabilities(i.e.,emergent
that focus on LLMs inference. Considering the pains in re-
abilities) that do not appear in smaller models, including
training a model with tens of billions of parameters, we
multi-step reasoning, instruction following, program exe-
generally divide LLM quantization methods into two parts
cution abilities, and etc. For example, GPT-3, LLaMA and
basedonwhetherthetechniqueneedsre-training.Methods
many other LLMs can solve few-shot tasks through in-
without re-training (i.e., post-training quantization, PTQ) are
context learning, and even zero-shot tasks. The breakout
discussed in Section 3.3 while methods that demand re-
of large language models present the surprising abilities
training(i.e.,quantization-awaretraining,QAT)isdiscussedin
(calledemergence)insolvingaseriesofcomplextasksover
Section3.4.Finally,inSection3.5,wediscusssomeadvanced
smallermodels.
topicsshowingpotentialforfutureresearchbutnotcovered
To further emphasize this difference, we catorgorize
inprevioussections.
languagemodelsoverhundredmillionsofparametersinto
mediummodelsandlargemodels.Specifically,modelswith
3.1 BasicConcepts
around one billion or less parameters are called medium
models, while those with over one billion parameters are Quantization has a history that is much longer than neural
calledlargemodels. networks, and specific quantization methods vary a lot. To
give readers a clear grasp of the diverse quantization con-
cepts, we will first introduce the standard uniform quanti-
2.3 Parameter-efficientFinetuning(PEFT)
zationandthecorrespondingdequantizationprocess.After
Aswediscussedintheintroduction,manymodelcompres-
that, we explain several fundamental concepts frequently
sionalgorithmssuchasknowledgedistillationandpruning
mentionedindifferentquantizationmethods.
require finetuning or even training for accuracy recovery
1) Uniform quantization. The most basic form of quanti-
after compression. Nevertheless, full-parameter finetuning
zation is to separate a real-valued range into uniform, finite
ortrainingisverycostlyformediumorlargemodels.Tothis intervals (e.g., 2b intervals for b-bit integer) and then map
end,manyparameterefficientfinetuning(PEFT)algorithms
realvalueswithinthesameintervaltothesameinteger.The
are proposed. They devote to finetune as few parameters
formulaofsuchaprocessisasfollows:
or epochs as possible to lower the finetuning cost. In this
r
paper, model compression and acceleration algorithms in Q(r)=ROUND( )+Z (3)
S
the inference stage (rather than training/finetuning stage)
are mainly discussed, but we still supplement some PEFT whereQ(·)isthequantizationoperator,r istherealvalues
algorithmsintheAppendixA. to be quantized, S is a real valued scaling factor, Z is an
integer zero point and ROUND(·) is a rounding operation
(e.g., round to nearest). This method is known as uniform
3 QUANTIZATION
Quantizationreferstotheprocessofmappinginputvalues 1.”memory-bound”meansthatthetransferbetweenthedeviceand
in a large (often continuous) set to output values in a small globalmemorynearlyreachesthelimitationorfetchingdatafromthe
memory is the bottleneck of the whole process. On the contrary, the
(often finite) set (see Fig. 2 for an example). It is the most
”compute-bound”processspendsmostofitstimecalculatingandnot
straightforward method to cut down memory cost and accessingmemory.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 4
Clipping range [𝛼,𝛽] be clipped to α or β respectively. The clipping range also
directlyinfluencesthescalingfactorS inuniformquantiza-
FP16
tion:
β−α
min max S = (6)
Scaling factor 𝑆 2b−1
In general, a wider clipping range results in fewer outliers
INT4 requiring clipping in the input data. However, this comes
-7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 … 6 7 atthecostofalargerscalefactor,asshowninEquation(6).
(a) Illustrationofuniformquantizationprocess Consequently, the quantization error for real values within
theclippingrangewouldalsobelarger.
FP16 Tensor
Choosing the clipping range is referred to as calibration.
1.2 -0.5 4.3 -3.1 0.8 2.4 5.4 5.4 1.3
Common choices of calibration involve using min/max
Get clipping Get scaling
range [𝛼,𝛽] factor 𝑆 values (i.e., −α = r min,β = r max), using absolute max
Rescale to [−7,7] values (i.e., −α = β = max(|r|)) or minimizing the infor-
mationloss(i.e.,KLdivergence)betweentherealvaluesand
Quantized –INT4 Tensor 2 -1 6 -4 1 3 7 quantizedvalues.
4)Symmetric/Asymmetricquantization.Whentheclipping
Divide by 𝑆 1.3 range [α,β] is symmetric with respect to 0 (α+β = 0 and
Z = 0), then corresponding method is often referred to as
Dequantized –FP16 Tensor 1.5 -0.8 4.6 -3.1 0.8 2.3 5.4
symmetricquantization;otherwiseasymmetricquantization.
The clipping range for asymmetric quantization is
(b) QuantizationandDe-quantizationofaFP16tensor
more compact, which is especially important for activa-
Fig. 2: (a) Uniform quantization separates a real-valued tions in neural networks whose range may be signifi-
rangeintouniform,finiteintervalsandthenmapsrealvalues cantly imbalanced (e.g., after ReLU, all activations become
within the same interval to the same integer. (b) An FP16 non-negative). Symmetric quantization, however, is more
tensorisquantizedintoINT4formatandthendequantized compute-efficientatthedequantizationstep.
backintoFP16. 5) Quantization Granularity. A categorization criterion
specified for quantization of neural network is the granu-
larity, which corresponds to which weights/activations are
quantization since the length of each interval is the same quantized together and share quantization parameters. We
(equal to scale factor S) and the quantized values are listtypicalgranularityfromcoarsetofineasfollows:
uniformlyspaced(e.g.,integers0,1,2,...).
The operation to recover real values from quantized • Layer-wise: Weights of all filters in a layer for con-
valuesiscalleddequantization: volution layers or the full weight matrix for linear
layersarequantizedtogether.
r˜=S·(Q(r)−Z) (4) • Channel-wise: Weights of a single filter for convolu-
tionlayersarequantizedtogether.
It should be noted that the recovered values r˜may be dif-
ferentfromtheoriginalrealvaluesrduetotheinformation • Row/Column-wise: Weights of a single row/column
of weight matrix for linear layers are quantized to-
lossintroducedbyROUND(·)function.
gether.
2) Non-uniform quantization. The counterpart of uniform
• Token-wise: Activations for each token are quantized
quantization is non-uniform quantization, where quantized
together.
valuesarenotnecessarilyuniformlyspaced,andthelength
• Group-wise: Several consecutive real values in
of intervals can be different. The general formula for non-
weights or activations are viewed as a group and
uniformquantizationis:
quantizedtogether.Thegroupsizeistypicallysmall
Q(r)=Q i, if r ∈[∆ i,∆ i+1) (5) (e.g.,64consecutiverealvalues).
where Q i is the candidate quantized values called quanti- In general, finer granularity divides model weights or acti-
zation levels, ∆ i and ∆ i+1 defines an interval in which real vationsintosmallergroups,whichcanreducequantization
valueswouldbemappedtocorrespondingQ i. errors. However, finer granularity requires storing more
Given a fixed bit-width, non-uniform quantization can quantizationparametersandintroduceshigherquantization
often achieve higher accuracy and lower quantization er- overheadduringcomputation.
ror than its uniform counterpart, as the weights of neural Note that different works may use different notations.
networks are generally not uniformly distributed. How- Forclarity,inthissurvey,wesetinputX∈RN×Din,weight
ever, non-uniform methods may suffer low computation matrixW ∈ RDin×Dout,whereN isthebatchsize,D in and
efficiency because these methods usually involve a time- D outareinputandoutputdimensionsrespectively.Alinear
consuminglookupoperationthatisnotdirectlycompatible layercanbewrittenasY =XW∈RN×Dout.
withparallelcomputationhardwarelikeGPU. 6) Post-Training Quantization/Quantization-Aware Train-
3) Clipping range and calibration. An important factor ing. An effective way to reduce quantization error is
associatedwithuniformquantizationisclippingrange[α,β] through training. Quantization methods can either require
so that real values lower than α or higher than β would re-trainingafterquantizationornot:

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 5
• Post-TrainingQuantization,PTQ:methodswithoutre- 9) Weight-only/Weight + Activation quantization. Whether
training, quantized models can be directly used in the quantization objective is only weights or both weights
inference. and activations. Previous work [21] found that activation
• Quantization-Aware Training, QAT: methods with re- quantization is generally more susceptible to weight quan-
training,whichhelpsrecovertheerrorintroducedby tization, so weight-only quantization can reach lower bit-
quantization. width. However, quantized weights must be dequantized
beforemultiplyingwithactivations,soweight-onlyquanti-
Perturbation to parameters of a trained model caused by
zationcannotbeinteger-onlyandwillintroduceadditional
quantization may push the model away from the point
computationoverheadduringinference.
where it had converged in floating-point-precision train-
We’ve briefly covered some of the most essential con-
ing. QAT addresses this issue through either simulating
cepts in quantization. These concepts are universally ap-
the quantization process in re-training (e.g., inject nodes in
plied to all neural network quantization, and each specific
the computation graph that simulate weight quantization)
method may suit several different concepts (e.g., a uniform
or using additional parameters to finetune the quantized
symmetric dynamic layer-wise simulated quantization method
model (e.g., combined with Adapters or LoRA) so that the
forLLMs).Wecategorizethemainquantizationmethodsfor
model can learn to converge to a point which will have a
LLMsaccordingtothesebasicconceptsinTABLE1.
betterperformanceafterquantization.However,re-training
of full LLM with billions of parameters has an unbearable
3.2 Quantization Methods for Medium-Size Language
cost to most researchers. Hence, PTQ methods are also
Models
extensively studied to achieve better performance without
introducing additional computation budgets through spe- Foreaseofexpression,werefertomodelswithsizessmaller
cificnon-trainingmethods(e.g.,OptimalBrainSurgery). thanorcloseto1Basmedium-sizelanguagemodels,repre-
Generally speaking, the rounding operation in quanti- sentedbyBERT,GPT-2,andBART.
zation is a non-differentiable process, so QAT may seem Quantization methods for medium-size language mod-
impossible at first sight. However, researchers found that els [22] mainly adopt the QAT framework instead of PTQ,
a simple method called Straight Through Estimator (STE) as the cost of re-training such a model is relatively accept-
works well under most circumstances, ignoring the round- able.Theimprovementinevaluationmetric(e.g.,accuracy)
ing operation and approximating it with an identity func- brought by re-training is significant, especially under ex-
tion. tremelow-bitsettings(e.g.,1-bitor2-bitquantization).Asa
7) Static/Dynamic quantization. A key difference between result,wewillfirstintroducemainstreammethods,i.e.,QAT
quantizingtheweightsandactivationsofaneuralnetwork methods,formedium-sizelanguagemodelsandthencover
liesinthefactthatweightsaremostlyfixedduringinference thePTQmethods.
so that the statistics used in clipping range calibration can
becomputedstatically.It’snotthecaseforactivationssince 3.2.1 QATforMedium-SizeLanguageModels
its range and statistics are unknown until runtime. Thus,
EarlyworksaimatquantizingweightsofBERT-likemodels
activationquantizationcanbedividedintotwocategories.
into INT8. Q8BERT [23] applies the basic QAT framework
from[24]toquantizebothweightsandactivationsofBERT
• Staticquantizationreferstothemethodswhosequan-
into 8-bits without significant reduction in model perfor-
tization parameters are pre-calculated before infer-
mance.
ence using some calibration inputs to find typical
Some works enable quantization into bit-width lower
activation statistics or learned jointly during neural
than 8-bit using more complicated methods [25], [26], [27],
networktraining.
[28], [29], [30], [31]. For example, Q-BERT [25] maintains
• Dynamicquantizationcalculatesquantizationparame-
8-bitactivationsandmixed-precisionweightsdownto2/3-
tersdynamicallyatruntime,whichisgenerallymore
bits. It uses the Hessian matrix to determine the bit-width
accuratethanitsstaticcounterpartbutcanhavehigh
forweightsofeachlayersothatmoreaggressivequantiza-
overheadforcalculatingrequiredstatistics(e.g.,min,
tion is performed for layers with smaller top eigenvalues
max,etc.).
of the corresponding Hessian. Further, TernaryBERT [27]
8) Simulated/Integer-Only quantization. Still, another cat- restricts its weights to -1, 0, +1, using only 2 bits, and em-
egory criterion is whether quantized values are used for ploys8-bitactivations.Knowledgedistillationisadoptedto
actual operations (e.g., matrix multiplication). For simulated overcomeperformancedegradationbyminimizingthesum
quantization (also called fake quantization), the weights and ofmean-squareerror(MSE)oftheactivationsandattention
activations are only stored in low-bit datatypes (e.g., INT4) scoresbetweentheoriginalandquantizedmodel.Following
andhavetobedequantizedtohigh-bitdatatypes(e.g.,float16) TernaryBERT, BinaryBERT [32] pushes the limit of BERT
to carry out actual operations. For Integer-only quantization, quantization to weight binarization, i.e., restricts weights
the operations can be carried out using low-bit datatypes. in{−α,+α}.TheauthorsproposetoinitializeBinaryBERT
Simulated quantization can reduce the memory cost and by equivalently splitting from a half-sized TernaryBERT to
data-movingtimeofneuralnetworks,whichishelpfulsince inheritthegoodperformanceoftheternaryone.Inaddition,
several works have shown that LLM inference is memory- BiBERT[28]isafullbinarizationofBERT(i.e.,1-bitweight,
bound rather than compute-bound1. In contrast, integer-only embedding,andactivation).Theauthorsidentifythesevere
quantization can further enjoy the acceleration of efficient performance degradation of the full binary model comes
low-bitoperationssupportedbyspecifichardware. from information degradation and optimization direction

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 6
mismatch. A Bi-Attention structure and a DirectionMatch- low-precision student model and the full precision teacher
ingDistillation(DMD)schemeareproposedaccordinglyto model.
retainmostoftheabilityoftheoriginalBERT. In this section, we only briefly cover the most impor-
Some works enable an automatic balance between tant works done on medium-sized language models. For a
the model performance degradation and quantization bit- more detailed summarization of quantization methods for
width. Zhao et al. [29] leverages a Differentiable Neural Ar- medium-sizedlanguagemodels,wereferinterestedreaders
chitectureSearchapproachtoassignprecisionforparameters to[39],[40].
automatically.Indetail,theweightsandthebitassignment
of weights are optimized alternatively under an objective
3.3 Post-TrainingQuantizationforLLMs
function that combines the cross entropy loss with the
The past few years have witnessed a remarkable surge in
penalty of model size. The optimization process aims to
post-trainingquantizationmethods(PTQ)forLLMs.Thisis
obtainasetofbitassignmentsforeachgroupofparameters
partlybecausePTQdoesn’tinvolveLLMs’prohibitivelyex-
closetooptimal.
pensivere-trainingprocess,soit’samorefeasibledirection
3.2.2 PTQforMedium-SizeLanguageModels formostresearchers.
Further, we roughly divide PTQ works for LLMs into
PTQ methods are carefully designed so they generally do
two categories: weight-only quantization and weight + ac-
notrequireextrafinetuningorre-trainingtocompensatefor
tivation quantization. We’ll discuss works related to these
quantization errors. GOBO [33] quantizes the vast majority
categoriesrespectivelyinthefollowingparts.
ofweightsthatcomplywithGaussiandistributioninto3bits
usingnon-uniformquantization(i.e.,clustering)andsavesa
3.3.1 Weight-OnlyQuantization.
fewoutlierweightsseparatelyinFP32.I-BERT[34]designs
integer-onlyapproximationmethodsforspecificnon-linear Inthispart,wefocusontheproblemofonlyquantizingthe
functions (e.g., GeLU, Softmax, LayerNorm) to enable end- weights(butnottheactivations)ofLLMs.Generally,weight-
to-end integer-only BERT inference without any floating only quantization belongs to simulated quantization meth-
point calculation. Dai et al. [35] use finer granularity to ods; the weights are only stored in low-bit datatype and
reduce quantization error. In detail, the authors quantize need to be dequantized before real computation. This means
weights and activations into 4 bits using group-wise quan- such methods can decrease the overall size of LLMs and
tization (e.g., 16 ∼ 64 consecutive weights as a group). A decrease the time to move weights between memories but
calibration set is used to determine the scaling factor for cannotenjoytheacceleratedlow-bitoperationsupportedby
eachgroup. specifichardware.
Furthermore, it should be noted that the quantization While the previous subsections have discussed various
parameters obtained by elaborately tailored PTQ methods methodsthatcanbeusedtoquantizemedium-sizelanguage
can,ingeneral,beagoodinitializationpointforre-training models, LLMs present additional challenges due to their
inQATmethods. uniquecharacteristics.Thesechallengesinclude:
1) LMs rely heavily on memory during the inference
3.2.3 QuantizeGenerativeMedium-SizeLanguageModels
process, especially when the inference batch size
Despite the success of quantization approaches for BERT-
is small [49]. This makes it crucial to minimize
like models mentioned above, attempts to quantize gener-
memory usage and optimize data transfer between
ative language models (e.g., GPT, BART) was scarce before
differentstoragedevices.
the emergence of generative LLMs [36]. The critical differ-
2) The activation patterns of LLMs are distinct,which
enceisthatquantizationerroraccumulatesinthetoken-by-
poses a challenge when applying quantization
tokengenerationprocess,soquantizinggenerativelanguage
methodsthatworkwellformedium-sizedlanguage
modelsisgenerallyamorecomplexproblem.
models.Systematicoutliers[43]areonesuchunique
AccordingtoTaoetal.[37],applyingquantizationmeth-
property of LLM activations that hinder the direct
ods that are designed for BERT-like models directly to
application of such methods for weight-only quan-
generative language models is hindered by homogeneous
tizationofLLMs.
wordembeddingandvarieddistributionofweights.Homo-
geneous word embedding refers to the problem where the Some works directly apply uniform, round-to-nearest
word embeddings of generative language models become quantization to LLMs with minor modifications [14], [21],
less distinguishable from each other after quantization. On [50]. ZeroQuant-V2 [21] quantize OPT and BLOOM. It
the other hand, varied distribution of weights means that shows that using 16-bit activations and directly quantiz-
theweightsofthemodelarehighlyskewedwithoutliers.To ing weights of these models to 8-bit integers using row-
tackle these challenges, the authors propose two solutions: wisesymmetricquantizationresultsinnegligibleperplexity
token-level contrastive distillation and module-dependent degradation,while4-bitweight-onlyquantizationwitnesses
dynamic scaling. DQ-BART [38] uses the QAT framework asignificantperformancedrop.Tofurtherpushthelimitof
andadistillationtrainingobjectivetodistillandquantizea low-bit quantization, ZeroQuant-V2 [21] propose the Low-
sequence-to-sequence model, i.e., BART, jointly. DQ-BART Rank Compensation (LoRC) method, which approximates
adopts the standard symmetric uniform quantization as the error E between the original weight matrix W and the
shown in Equation (3) and sets the training objective as quantized weight matrix
Wˆ
using a storage-efficient low-
minimizing the differences of the output logits, attentions, rank matrix
Eˆ
so that
Wˆ +Eˆ
would be a better approx-
and hidden states between the quantized and distilled imation of the original weight W. However, Zeng et al.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 7
TABLE1:DetailedcategoryofseveralstrongbaselinequantizationmethodsforLLMs.✓meansthataquantizationmethod
belongs to a specific category, × vice versus, and ◦ means a quantization method can be used in both circumstances. For
methods that work in different bit widths, we report the lowest effective bit width. For a detailed explanation of each
category,pleaserefertoSubsection3.1
Method #Bits Weight Activation Uniform Symmetric Static Re-Training Zero-shot Integer-Only
AWQ[41] 3 group-size − ✓ × ✓ × × ×
OPTQ/GPTQ[42] 3 column-wise − ✓ × ✓ × × ×
LLM.int8()[43] 8 column-wise row-wise ✓ ◦ × × ✓ ✓
ZeroQuant[44] 4 group-wise tokenwise-wise ✓ ✓ × ◦ ◦ ✓
SmoothQuant[45] 8 layer-wise layer-wise ✓ ✓ ◦ × × ✓
LLM-QAT[46] 2 column-wise tokenwise-wise ✓ ✓ × ✓ × ×
INT2.1[47] 2 column-wise − ✓ × ✓ ✓ × ×
QLoRA[48] 4 column-wise − × ✓ ✓ ✓ × ×
[14] found that GLM-130B can be directly quantized into N(0,1) to find its quantized values Q i (See Equation (5)
4-bit weights using row-wise symmetric quantization with for definition of Q i). In practice, weights to be quantized
negligible performance degradation, which is evaluated by are rescaled to range [−1,1] and then round to nearest
zero-shot accuracy on the LAMBADA dataset. The authors quantizedvaluesX i i.e.,round-to-nearest(RTN)methods.
ascribe the appealing 4-bit quantization property of GLM- Above are zero-shot methods that only consider the min-
130B to its weight distributions being well-shaped and imize the difference between the original weight matrix W
not skewed compared to GPT-style models like OPT and andthequantizedweightmatrixQ(W),i.e.,tominimizethe
BLOOM. quantizationerrorofweightmatrixargmin Wˆ||W−Q(W)||.
However, considering the high non-linearity of neural net-
Anotherlineofresearchconsidersnon-uniformmethods
works,asmalldistanceinweightspacedoesn’tnecessarily
in weight-only quantization of LLMs. The critical insight
mean a small difference between the output of the original
lies in the fact that the weight distribution of LLMs after
and quantized models. Thus, if given a small set of typical
training is non-uniform, so it makes sense to let interval
examples C, called calibration set, there are some one-shot
[∆ i,∆ i+1) in Equation (4) also be non-uniform to push the
methods [41], [42], [54], [55] consider to optimize the dif-
quantizationeventolowerbit-width.LUT-GEMM[51](also
ference between the output activations of the original and
known as nuQmm) extends a non-uniform quantization
quantizedlayers:
method, binary-coding quantization (BCQ) [52], which fac-
torizesthefull-precisionparametersintobinaryparameters argmin Wˆ||XW−XQ(W)|| forX∈C (7)
andaseparatesetofscalingfactors.Theauthorsaddabias
termtoconventionalBCQmethodstoincreasetherepresen- A typical work of one-shot methods for weight-only
tationalcapacityandusegroup-wisequantizationtoenable LLM quantization is GPTQ (also known as OPTQ) [42],
a tradeoff between the compression ratio and model per- whichisbuiltonanadaptiveroundingmethodcalledOpti-
formance.SqueezeLLM[49]verifiesthattheLLMinference malBrainQuantization(OBQ)[56].OBQhandleseachrow
is memory-bound with extremely low arithmetic intensity oftheweight matrixindependently,quantizingoneweight
relative to other neural networks. Besides, SqueezeLLM at a time while updating all not-yet-quantized weights to
adoptssensitivity-basedk-meanscentroidsasthequantized compensate for the error incurred by quantizing a single
weight values for non-uniform quantization (see X i in weight. However, OBQ is not explicitly designed for LLMs
Equation (5)). The sensitivity-based k-means method ap- and can be slow and inaccurate in practice. To fix these
proximatestheHessianmatrixofweightsasthesensitivity, problems, GPTQ quantizes weights of all rows in parallel
highlightingtheimportanceofminimizingperturbationsfor to improve efficiency, uses lazy batch updates to achieve a
weights with large Hessian values. SqueezeLLM has better higher compute-to-memory ratio in the quantization pro-
perplexity than standard uniform quantization methods cess, and uses Cholesky reformulation to help numerical
while achieving around 2× speedup compared to the FP16 stability. GPTQ can quantize OPT-175B or BLOOM-176B in
baseline.Dettmersetal.[48]proposeanewNormalFormat around 4 hours on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU with these
(NF) datatype, which can also be viewed as non-uniform modifications. Further, GPTQ can provide reasonable accu-
quantization. The NF datatype builds on Quantile Quan- racy under extreme quantization where weights are quan-
tization[53],aninformation-theoreticallyoptimaldatatype tizedto2-bitorlower.QuIP[55]definesafamilyofadaptive
thatensureseachquantizationintervalhasanequalnumber rounding methods for optimizing the Equation (7) and
ofvaluesassignedfromtheinputtensor.Theauthorsutilize definestheoptimalmethodwithinthepre-definedfamilyof
that pre-trained neural network weights usually have a methods,calledLDLQ.LDLQusestheLDLdecomposition
zero-centered normal distribution with standard deviation of the second-moment matrix of vectors in the calibration
σ, thus can be normalized to the standard normal distri- settofindtheoptimalwaytoupdatethenot-yet-quantized
bution N(0,1) by scaling σ. k-bit NormalFormat use k- weights. The authors show that GPTQ is a particular case
bit Quantile Quantization on standard normal distribution of LDLQ. Further, QuIP proposes incoherence processing

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 8
that can transform the weight matrix into a more suitable multiplicationthusbecomes:
f po rr om cesf so ir ngq ,u Qan ut Ii Pza it sio thn e. C firo sm tb Li Ln Ming quL aD nL tiQ zata ion nd min ec to hh oe dre tn hc ae
t
Xf16Wf16 ≈ (cid:88) Xd fˆ 16Wd fˆ 16+Sf16· (cid:88) Xd i8Wd
i8
(8)
has viable results on 2-bit weight-only quantization. AWQ dˆ∈O d∈/O
[41]showsthatpreservingonly0.1%channelscorrespond- where Sf16 is the dequantization factor. The number of
ingtosignificantactivationinFP16andquantizingtherest outlier dimensions |O| is quite small, so this decompo-
of the weight matrix can contribute to much better model sition would only consume more than 0.1% additional
performance, meaning weights are not equally important. memory typically. Instead of separating outliers into an
Further, AWQ intends to reduce the quantization error additional matrix, RPTQ [63] proposes to cluster and re-
for the essential weights without using mixed-precision, order the dimensions of activation X ∈ RN×Din based on
which is hard to implement efficiently. This is achieved by the minimum and maximum of the dimension i, denoted
activation-aware scaling, which automatically finds a per- as (Xmin,i,Xmax,i). The idea is to group dimensions with
(input) channel scaling ratio s with an objective similar outliers into the same cluster and perform cluster-wise
to Equation (7) i.e., argmin ||(s−1 · X)Q(W · s) − XW|| quantization. It should be noted that the statistics of each
s
suchthatthesalientweightswithhighscalingfactorcanbe activation dimension are measured on a calibration set so
betterrepresented.Incontrast,non-salientweightswillnot that the clustering can be done before inference to find
beneglected.OWQ[57]isanadvancementoverOPTQthat the new order of dimensions. To further reduce latency,
significantlyenhancesthequalityofthequantizedmodel.It RPTQ fuses the reorder operation into other operations: 1)
usesamixed-precisionquantizationscheme,whichapplies CombinewiththeLayerNormoperationtoavoidadditional
higher precision to the weights susceptible to quantization datamovementandadjust.2)ReordercolumnsofweightW
caused by activation outliers. The sensitive weights are toreorderthedimensionsoftheoutputY=XW.
identifiedusingasensitivity-basedmethodsimilarto[49]. Recently, low-bit floating-point formats (e.g., FP4, FP8)
There are also some studies focusing on rounding cri- have emerged as promising alternatives for LLM quanti-
teria in quantization. SignRound [58] suggests that as the zation [64], [65], [66]. FP8 format has garnered support
bit-width of quantization decreases, the quantization grid from leading hardware vendors like NVIDIA despite its
broadens,thusemphasizingtheimportanceofupanddown potentially higher hardware costs. Intuitively, low-bit FP
rounding. It extends previous work [59] to learn weight formats can be viewed as a particular case of non-uniform
rounding with signed gradient descent and can achieve quantization,offeringatypicallymoreextensivedatarange
goodresultswithin400optimizationsteps. andhigherprecisionforsmallvaluesbutlowerprecisionfor
large ones. Such characteristics of the FP format help solve
outlier problems in activations. MoFQ (Mixture-of-Formats
3.3.2 Weight+ActivationQuantization. Quantization) [64], and ZeroQuant-FP [65] both show that
FP8 quantization is consistently better than INT8 when it
QuantizingbothweightsandactivationsofLLMsisanon-
comestoactivationquantization.MoFQfurtherprovidesan
trivial problem for several reasons. First, the range and
algorithm to determine the optimal data format from some
statistics of activation are unknown until actual runtime.
candidates (INT4, INT8, FP4, FP8) for each layer based on
Second,quantizingweightsandactivationsenablesefficient
tensorerror,layeroutputerror,ormodeloutputerror.Also,
low-bit datatype operations on specific hardware. Third,
MoFQreallocatesspecialNaN(NotaNumber)andInf(In-
systematic outliers appearing in the LLM activations are
finity)valuesinstandardFPformatstonormalizednumbers
vitaltothemodelperformance,andshouldn’tbeclippedin
to enhance and let the FP format represent more values,
quantization. While the first two reasons apply to all mod-
which is especially important for low-bit formats like FP4.
els, the third reason is unique to LLMs and differentiates
ZeroQuant-FPquantizesbothweightandactivationintoFP
methodsforLLMsfrommethodsforpreviousmodels.
format. For cases using FP4 weights and FP8 activations,
Similar to its weight-only counterpart, weight + activa- ZeroQuant-FPproposesabit-shiftingmethodtocastFP4to
tion quantization can also use basic uniform quantization FP8toimproveinferenceefficiencyefficiently.
methods [21], [43], [44], [63] but with a special notification Another promising way is to suppress outliers that ap-
ofoutliersinactivations.LLM.int8()[43]emphasizesthe
pear in the activation dimensions [45], [67], [68], [69], [70].
emergence of extreme outliers in LLM’s activations as the The general idea is that we can scale down the outlier
model size scales up. The authors show that these out- dimensions i in activations by factor s i and scale up the
liers are highly systematic. Given input activation X f16 ∈ corresponding dimension in the weight matrix by factor s i
RN×Din to a linear layer, outliers occur systematically for withoutchangingtheoutputofthelayer:
almost all N tokens in a sequence. Still, they are limited
to specific feature/hidden dimensions dˆ∈ {1,2,...,D in}.
Y=XW=(Xˆdiag(s))·(diag(s)−1Wˆ)=Xˆ Wˆ
(9)
LLM.int8() thus propose to separate the outlier feature sothattheactivationXˆ afterscalingwouldbequantization-
dimensions O = {dˆ|dˆ∈ Z,1 ≤ dˆ≤ D in} which contains friendly. SmoothQuant [45] computes the per-dimension
all feature dimensions
dˆ
that have at least one activation scalingfactorusing:
outlierwithamagnitudemoresignificantthanthethreshold
α. The outlier dimensions are preserved in high-precision s i =max(|Xi|)α/max(|W j|)1−α (10)
datatypes (e.g., FP16) while average values are quantized whereαisahyperparametertocontrolhowmuchdifficulty
using symmetric uniform quantization into low-precision will be migrated from activation to weights. Outlier Sup-
datatypes (e.g., INT8). With Einstein’s notation, the matrix pression[67]discoversthatγ inLayerNormactsasasinful

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 9
TABLE2:ThefollowingtableshowstheperplexityofvariousstrongbaselinequantizationmethodsforLLMsonWikitext-
2 [60] and C4 [61]. Please note that the intention is not to compare the perplexity after quantization directly, as different
quantization methods may perform best on different models with different scales. This table only serves as a rough
comparison of the effects of different quantization methods. We strongly recommend readers refer to the original papers
fordetailedresultsindifferentsettings.Thereportedresultsarederivedfromtheoriginalpapers,exceptforQLoRA,whose
resultisderivedfromLoftQ[62].
#Bits #Bits Perplexity(↓)
Dataset Method Model Speedup
Weights Activations
FP16Model QuantizedModel
AWQ[41] 3 16 OPT-66B 10.09 10.46 1.85×
OPTQ/GPTQ[42] 3 16 OPT-175B 8.34 8.68 3.24×
ZeroQuant[21] 4 8 BLOOM-176B 8.11 8.33 -
Wikitext-2 SmoothQuant[45] 8 8 LLaMA-65B 6.17 6.20 1.56×
LLM-QAT[46] 4 8 LLaMA-30B 7.00 7.50 -
INT2.1[47] 2 16 LLaMA-7B 5.08 8.74 -
QLoRA[48] 3 16 LLaMA-13B 5.12 5.22 -
OPTQ/GPTQ[42] 3 16 OPT-175B 10.13 10.67 3.24×
LLM.int8()[43] 8 8 OPT-13B 12.45 12.45 1.22×
C4 ZeroQuant[21] 4 8 BLOOM-176B 10.97 11.22 -
LLM-QAT[46] 4 8 LLaMA-30B 6.00 6.90 -
INT2.1[47] 2 16 LLaMA-7B 7.52 12.52 -
amplifier for the outliers. Hence, it proposes the Gamma smaller quantization error between the original value and
Migrationmethod,whichusesγ−1 inthepreviouslayeras the dequantized value, which trades efficiency for higher
the scaling factor s. Outlier Suppression+ [68] extends the model performance. OilVe [73] employs the outlier-victim
methodthroughintroducingadditionalshiftingfactorz: pair(OVP)mechanism,whichprunessomequantizedlow-
precision normal values to make extra space for the high-
Y=XW=(Xˆdiag(s)+z)·(diag(s)−1Wˆ)
precisionoutliers.
(11)
=Xˆ Wˆ +zW=Xˆ Wˆ +bˆ.
As a summary of PTQ methods for LLMs quantiza-
tion, we briefly compare and contrast the weight-only
The per-dimension shifting factor is computed as z i = and weight+activation quantization methods here. On the
(max(Xi) + min(Xi))/2, which helps remove the asym-
one hand, weight-only quantization methods can push the
metry in the activation Xˆ = (X − z)diag(s). FPTQ [69]
quantization limit to lower bit-widths (even to 3 bits or 2
proposes a new offline logarithmic activation equalization
bits),whichsignificantlyreducesthememorysizeofdevices
(LAE) method that moderates activation distributions in a
requiredbyLLMs.Thisisbecausemodelweightsusemost
non-linear fashion, each channel of the scaling factor s is
ofthememory.Ontheotherhand,weight+activationquan-
computedas:
tization can take advantage of the additional speedup that
s i =max(|X i|)/log 2(2+max(|X i|)) (12) comeswithefficientlow-bitarithmeticsupportedbyspecific
hardware and doesn’t introduce additional dequantization
While the above methods use hand-craft quantization overhead during inference. However, these methods often
parameters such as scaling factor s, Outlier Suppression+ require more bit-width (∼ 8 bits) to store the weights and
in contrast proposes to find optimal scaling factor s by activations. Both weight-only and weight+activation quan-
optimizingthefollowingobjectiveusingacalibrationset: tization methods have their strengths and weaknesses, and
theyarebothactiveresearchdirectionswithgreatpotential
minE[||XW−(Q(Xˆ)Q(Wˆ)+bˆ)||2].
(13)
2 anddemand.
s
Further, OmniQuant [70] proposes learning the clipping
range [α,β] to modulate the extreme values of weights.
3.4 Quantization-AwareTrainingforLLMs
QLLM[71]proposesauniqueapproachtohandlingoutliers
in activations. The technique involves an adaptive channel Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) is the method of re-
reassemblyprocessthatsplitstheoutlierchannelsintomul- trainingaquantizedmodeltorecoverfromtheperformance
tiple sub-channels. This ensures a more even distribution degradationcausedbythequantization.Asisillustratedin
of activation magnitudes. The process also merges similar the previous sections, QAT for models before LLMs (e.g.,
channels,maintaining theoriginal channelnumber foreffi- CNN, medium-size LM) has achieved impressive success.
ciencypurposes. However, such methods often involve full-parameter re-
There are also some recent studies employing methods training of the entire model, which is too expensive for
that do not fall into any of the previous paragraphs, so we LLMs, so there are also some attempts to combine quan-
brieflycoverthemhereforcompleteness.REx[72]quantizes tizationwithparameter-efficienttrainingmethodstosignif-
the quantization error, i.e., W − Q(W), so that there is a icantlylowerthecostofQATonLLMs.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 10
As a result, we divide current QAT methods on LLMs LACos-BLOOM [76] quantizes the model weights using 8-
into two categories: full-paramter re-training and parameter- bit block-wise uniform quantization. The quantized model
efficient re-training. We’ll discuss works in these two cate- is then finetuned using a scalable LoRA and 8-bit Adam
goriesrespectivelyinthefollowingparts. optimizer.INT2.1[47]utilizedGPTQtoquantizeLLMsinto
INT2 and found that the behavior of the quantized model
3.4.1 Full-ParameterRe-Training. deviates significantly from the original full-precision coun-
TheprimaryconcernofusingtheQATframeworkinLLMs terpart. INT2.1 integrates additional trainable parameters
is re-training them on a smaller dataset without hurting (LoRA matrices) into the model and solely updates the
theiremergentabilities,suchasin-contextlearning.Current
LoRAmatriceswithtakesupofonly5%oftotalparameters.
methods often combine QAT and distillation to preserve The training objective combines a scaled Kullback-Leibler
theseabilitiesoftheoriginal(teacher)model[74],[75]. divergence from the full precision model to the quantized
LLM-QAT[46]directlyappliesthebasicQATframework one and the cross entropy loss to encourage accurate next
[24]toLLMs.Tocopewiththeproblem,LLM-QATproposes token prediction. Their experiment indicates that an INT2
to use a data-free distillation method, where the data is Large Language Model (LLM) finetuned with LoRA can
generatedusingtheoriginalLLM,andthequantizedLLMis generate linguistically coherent English text and exhibit
trainedtomatchtheoutputdistributionoftheoriginalLLM adherencetoprescribedinstructions.
onthegenerateddata.Also,LLM-QATenablesquantization Other works [79], [80] freeze the quantization indices
andQATofkey-valuecaches,whichtakesuplargememory and solely finetune quantization parameters (e.g., scaling
inthelongsentencegenerationprocess. factor S in uniform quantization and quantization level
To alleviate the unbearable cost of re-training full LLM, ∆ i in non-uniform quantization). AlphaTuning [79] works
ZeroQuant [21], [44], [65] proposes a layer-to-layer knowl- by employing binary-coding quantization [52]. During the
edgedistillationmethod.ThemethodusestheoriginalLLM adaptationphase,thebinaryvaluesarefrozenforalltasks,
asateacherandprocessestheweightsofLLMinalayer-by- whilethescalingfactorsarefine-tunedforthedownstream
layer order. Assume the LLM has N layers L 1,L 2,...,L N task.PEQA[80]quantizeseachfullyconnectedlayerofLMs
and has some input dataset X and the quantized ver- into a matrix of low-bit integers and a scalar vector using
sion of L k is Q(L K). After QAT and distillation of layers uniform quantization. Subsequently, finetuning occurs on
L 1,L 2,...,L k−1,weusethefollowinglosstoupdateL k: thescalarvectorforeachdownstreamtask.
Worksalsocombinequantizationwithadapters[81]and
L k =MSE(L k·L k−1...L 1(X)−Lˆ k·L k−1...L 1(X)) (14) prompttuning[82].
3.4.2 Parameter-EfficientRe-Training.
3.5 OtherTopicsforLLMQuantization
Thereareabunchofworksusingparameter-efficientmeth-
ods (e.g., LoRA, Adapter, Prompt Tuning) to finetune the Some quantization-related works can not be categorized
LLMs, which will be discussed in Appendix A. In this sec- intoPTQorQAT;wediscusssuchworksinthissection.
tion,wediscusssomemethodsthatuseparameter-efficient One important topic is co-designing efficient kernels
methodsinthere-trainingprocessofQAT. along with quantization algorithms [83], [84], designing
Typical works [47], [48], [62], [71], [76], [77], [78] adopt hardware-friendly quantization methods [85], [86] and in-
Low-Rank Adaption (LoRA) to re-train quantized LLMs tegrating quantization methods in real-world applications
in a relatively acceptable compute budget. QLoRA [48] [87],[88],[89],[90],[91].LUT-GEMM[51]isanefficientker-
quantize the weight of LLMs into 4-bit NormalFormat and neldesignedforanextendedversionofBCQmethods[52],
subsequentlyadoptLoRAwith16-bitBrainFloattofinetune which can represent both uniform and non-uniform quan-
the quantized model on downstream tasks with cross en- tization. Since weights are characterized by a binary vector
tropy loss. It further introduces a technique named double andscalefactorsinBCQ,LUT-GEMMcanpre-computeand
quantization, which quantizes the quantization parameters store all possible combinations of full-precision activations
to compress further the model’s size in the trade of com- and binary patterns in a lookup table (LUT) to avoid re-
putation speed. Combining all these techniques, QLoRA peatedcomputationandremovedequantizationofweights,
enablesfinetuninga65BLLMonaGPUwith30Gmemory whichacceleratesthelatencyofOPT-175Bmodelwith3-bit
efficiently. Following QLoRA, QA-LoRA [78] proposes to quantizationby2.1×comparedtoconventionalsimulated
integrategroup-wisequantizationintoQLoRA.Theauthors quantization. Many uniform [21], [43], [44], [73] and non-
suggest that quantization parameters in QLoRA are much uniform quantization methods [49] discussed in the above
less than LoRA parameters, resulting in an imbalance be- sections also design special kernels to reduce the overall
tween quantization and low-rank adaptation, while group- latency.
wiseoperationscanalleviatetheproblembyincreasingthe Other meaningful works study the intrinsic character-
number of parameters of quantization and decreasing that istics of LLM quantizations [92], [93], [94]. For example,
of adaptation. Besides, LoftQ [62] finds the zero initializa- Dettmers and Zettlemoyer [93] run extensive experiments
tionofLoRAmatricesinQLoRAinefficientfordownstream with 16-bit activations and k-bit weights (3 ≤ k ≤ 8)
tasks. Instead, LoftQ proposes to initialize the LoRA ma- at scales of 19M to 176B parameters across LLM families
trices with the singular value decomposition (SVD) of the BLOOM, OPT, NeoX/Pythia and GPT-2. The authors focus
difference between the original and quantized weights, i.e., on the tradeoff between zero-shot ability and total model
W−Q(W).LoftQalternatesbetweenquantizationandSVD bits and show that 4-bit precision is almost universally
to obtain a better approximation of the original weights. optimal for the tradeoff across different LLM classes and

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 11
quantization methods. Liu et al. [94] aim to investigate Theanswerstothesetwoproblemscorrespondrespectively
the impact of quantization on emergent abilities, which are tothepruningunitandmetric.Wewillintroducethesetwo
essential characteristics that distinguish LLMs from small fundamentalconceptsandsomeotherbasicones.
language models. Their empirical experiments show that 1) Pruning Unit. The first fundamental problem with
emergent abilities still exist in 4-bit quantization models, pruning is what kind of elements should be pruned. The
while 2-bit models encounter severe performance degra- pruning units refer to the minimal pruning elements in the
dation on the test of these abilities. The authors conduct pruning process, encompassing elements such as weights,
furtherdetailedexperimentsonenhancingtheperformance neurons, attention heads, layers, and etc. Based on pruning
ofextremelylow-bitmodels. units,pruningmethodscanbebroadlycategorizedintoun-
Some works [67], [95], [96] also focus on studying the structuredpruningandstructuredpruning.Inunstructured
reasons behind the emergence of systematic outliers in pruning,thepruningunitsfocusonindividualweights.The
LLMsandlookingforwaystosuppresstheoutliersfromthe weightstobeprunedarezeroedout.Whereasinstructured
source.QuantizableTransformer[95]ascribestheoutliersin pruning, the pruning units encompass broader network
activations to the behavior of attention heads that try not structures,suchasneurons,attentionheads,andlayers.The
to update residual. The authors designed clipped softmax structurestobeprunedareremovedfromthenetworks.
and gated attention accordingly to grant the model the Unstructuredpruningtendstogetahighersparsityratio
abilitytoproduceminimalmagnitude(orevenexactzeros) and maintain better performance as it is not limited to
outputofattentionfunctionwithouthavingoutliers.Outlier the network structure and can prune individual weights.
suppression [67], however, treats γ in LayerNorm as the However, the irregularly sparse patterns of weight matri-
sinful amplifier of outliers. There is still no consensus on ces, stemming from the non-systematically occurring zero
the source of activation outliers. However, Ahmadian et al. values, exhibit computational efficiency nearly equivalent
[96] find that outlier dimensions may not be an inherent todensematrices.Consequently,achievingsignificantgains
product of scale as is thought in previous works [43], but ininferencespeedupisinfrequentinunstructuredpruning.
rathersensitivetotheoptimizationconditions(e.g.,dropout Structured pruning makes it easy to achieve inference
rate,weightdecay,datatype)presentduringpre-training. speedup as it prunes network structures (e.g., attention
heads, feed-forward network (FFN) neurons, and hidden
dimensions). Yet inevitably integrated structure deletions
4 PRUNING
may cause the performance descent of the model. To avoid
Asaconventionaltechniqueemployedforthecompression model collapse, the sparsity ratios of structured pruned
and acceleration of neural networks, pruning eliminates modelsarelowerthanunstructuredones.
non-essentialweightsorstructuresfrommodels,whilepre- Formally, a binary mask z usually covers the pruning
serving the performance of the networks at a level nearly unit during the pruning process and is multiplied into the
equivalent to their original state. Although pruning has modelafterpruned.Forunstructuredpruning,thepruning
shown remarkable results in CNNs [97], its effectiveness is process can be defined as a constrained optimization prob-
lessrobustforLLMswhencomparedtoothercompression lem:
techniquessuchasquantizationanddistillation.Thereason
1 (cid:88)N
w tuh ny ingpru pn roin ceg ssb .ec To hm ee hs igle hss ce of sf tec oti fve finc eo -m tue ns inf grom dut ehe tofin the e- m w,i znL(w⊙z;D)=m w,i zn
N
ℓ(w⊙z;(x i,y i)),
(15)
i=1
large number of model parameters makes it more difficult s.t. ∥z∥
0
≤t,
to achieve the full effect of pruning. Nevertheless, pruning
isacrucialtechniqueforcompressingmodels,necessitating where ⊙ corresponds to the element-wise product, w =
furtherexplorationtoenhanceandrefineitseffectivenessin {w 1,w 2,...,w M} is the network weights, D is a dataset
yieldingimprovedresultsinLLMs. composed of N input x i and output y i pairs, and t is
In the following section, we will provide an overview the target non-sparsity ratio (i.e., one minus sparsity ratio).
of pruning methods and basic concepts in Section 4.1. Sub- Similarly, the pruning process for structured pruning is as
sequently, in Section 4.2, we will expound upon pruning follows:
techniques tailored for medium-size language models (i.e., 1 (cid:88)N
m simod ile al rs itw iei sth wip thar Lam LMet se .r Ss ei cn tiob nill 4io .3ns w), ilg li dv ee ln veth ine ti or ast dru ec tatu ilr ea dl m w,i znL(s⊙z;D)=m w,i zn
N
i=1ℓ(s⊙z;(x i,y i)),
(16)
explorationofpruningmethodologiesspecificallydesigned s.t. f(z;s)≤t,
for LLMs. Finally, in Section 4.4, we will introduce some
auxiliarytechniquesthatarenotpruningmethodsbutasso- where s = {s 1,s 2,...,s K} is the pruning structures com-
ciated with pruning to improve LLM pruning results, and
posedofw,andf(·)isthefunctiontocomputenon-sparsity
then discuss the challenges for future advancements in the ratioaccordingtothebinarymasksandstructures.
fieldofLLMpruning. 2) Pruning Metric. The second fundamental problem
with pruning is how to determine whether an element
is essential and should be pruned or not. Pruning metric
4.1 BasicConcepts
is the answer to this problem. The pruning metric is the
Numerous classification criteria exist for pruning. Never- criterion to identify the importance of the pruning units. It
theless, the most significant things among them are two can be roughly divided into three parts: magnitude-based,
fundamental problems: what to prune and how to prune. loss-based(i.e.,consideringthefirst-orderandsecond-order

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 12
(a) Pruning Training Fine-tuning after pruning, thus different inputs share the same pruned
network. Static pruning methods can be classified as pre-
training pruning, during-training pruning and post-training
(b) Training and Pruning Fine-tuning pruningaccordingtothepruningperiod,asshowninFig.3.
• Pre-training pruning: prunes the initialized network
firstandthentrainsthesparsenetwork.
(c) Training Pruning Fine-tuning • During-trainingpruning:trainsandprunesthedense
network at the same time, where regularization
Fig. 3: Three classes of static pruning methods. (a) Pre- methodsarerepresentative.
training pruning; (b) During-training pruning; (c) Post- • Post-training pruning: is the most popular type of
trainingpruning. pruning pipeline, prunes the trained dense network
to get a sparse network, where they usually follow
atraining,pruning,andfine-tuningparadigmaswe
derivativeinformationoftheweighsbelongingtotheprun-
mentionedbefore.
ingunits),andregularization.
The magnitude-based pruning methods use the magni- 4) Iterative/One-shot Pruning. As pruning damages
tudes(i.e.,absolutevalues)ofweightsandactivationvalues modelperformanceinevitably,apopularparadigmofprun-
asapartofthepruningmetrics.Thefundamentalprinciple ing pipeline consists of three steps: training, pruning, and
underlying this class of methods is that the magnitude of fine-tuning, as shown in Fig. 3 (b), (c). The initial step
weight or the activation value from the pruning unit intu- involves training the network to ascertain the importance
itivelyreflectsitsimportance.Themagnitudeoftheweight of individual pruning units. Subsequently, the second step
alone can serve as a pruning metric, constituting a well- entails the removal of non-essential pruning units through
knownfoundationalpruningmethodknownasMagnitude pruning,andthethirdstepfocusesonfine-tuningtorecover
Pruning [98]. Magnitude Pruning is the vanilla magnitude- theperformanceofthemodelpost-pruning.
basedpruningmethod.Inthismethod,athresholdissetto Giventhepotentialforthefine-tuningprocesstorender
zerooutweightswithsmallermagnitudeandthethreshold initiallyzero-valuedweightsasnon-zero,thefinaltwosteps
typically is derived from sparsity ratio. Despite the defini- are subject to iterative repetition until the targeted sparsity
tion of importance score being quite heuristic, Magnitude ratioisachieved.Thisiterativedesignunderscoresthateach
Pruningdemonstratesefficacyacrossvariousmodels. pruning step is succeeded by a fine-tuning step, thereby
In addition to the intuitive magnitude-based metric, facilitating the preservation of the model’s performance.
another more sophisticated kind of metric is the loss-based Thesemethodscontainingiterativepruningandfine-tuning
metric. The loss-based metric is designed to attribute the roundsareclassifiedasiterativepruning.
importanceofapruningunittoitsimpactonloss.Iftheloss However, as the model parameters get huger, the itera-
increasessignificantlyafterpruninganelement,itindicates tivepruningandfine-tuningprocessisexpensiveandtime-
that the element should not be pruned. More precisely, consuming.Thusmorepruningmethodstendtoprunethe
followingthepruningofanelement,thegreatertheincrease networkonlyoncetothetargetsparsityratio,discardingthe
in loss, the more crucial the importance of that element iterative pruning and fine-tuning rounds. These methods
becomes. However, examining the loss after pruning indi- areclassifiedasone-shotpruning.
vidualelementsonebyoneisresource-andtime-intensive. 5)Global/Local Pruning.Theearlypruningapproaches
In contrast, employing the Taylor expansion provides a compare all the pruning units to identify and eliminate
more convenient expeditious method for elucidating the those less essential. Given that the comparison scope in
loss alteration. The alteration in loss after the pruning can these methods encompasses the entire network, they are
be quantified using a Taylor expansion, incorporating the categorized as global pruning approaches. However, global
first-order or second-order derivatives of the pruning units pruning permits distinct sparsity ratios for individual local
with respect to the loss and higher-order ones, which are regions. It might result in excessive pruning of a specific
usually ignored. In comparison to the resource- and time- region(e.g.,alayer,acolumn),andexertanotableinfluence
intensive approach of evaluating loss after pruning each on the overall performance of the model. The resolution of
elementindividually,thecomputationofthefirst-orderand this issue lies in the application of local pruning method-
second-order derivatives emerges as a more efficient and ologies. Local pruning imposes constraints on the sparsity
time-savingalternative. of each region, thereby ensuring that the sparsity ratios
Besides, regularization methods encompass L 0, L 1, and withineachregiondonotreachexcessivelylowthresholds,
L 2 regularization. While L 1 regularization is known for consequentlymitigatingtheriskofmodelcollapse.
inducing sparsity in weights, L 0 regularization is a more 6)Data-driven/Data-freePruning.Thecategorizationof
commonlyemployedregularizationapproachinthecontext pruning methods into data-driven and data-free modalities
ofpruning. distinguishes the reliance on data for pruning decisions.
3) Dynamic/Static Pruning. To enhance adaptability Specifically,data-drivenpruningmethods,exemplifiedbythe
to diverse inputs, a kind of pruning method, referred to majority of pruning techniques, derive pruning decisions
as dynamic pruning, constructs the network in a manner from available data. Conversely, data-free pruning methods,
contingent upon the specific input characteristics. We will such as Magnitude Pruning [98], execute network pruning
these later in Section 7. In contrast, static pruning methods independentofdatainput.Ingeneral,data-drivenpruning
prune the model at training time and fix the architecture methods tend to exhibit superior performance, given their

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 13
dependence on data-driven insights, while data-free prun- 4.2.1 Unstructured Pruning for Medium-Size Language
ingmethodsarelesseffectivebutdata-independent. Models
7)Upstream/Downstream Pruning.Thetrainingoflan-
Unstructured pruning methods zero out non-essential
guage models involves two main stages—pre-training and weightswithoutanyspecificconstraints.Wewillintroduce
fine-tuning. Pruning methods can be classified based on unstructured pruning methods for medium-size language
when they are applied. Techniques identified as upstream models in a systematic order based on specific metrics,
pruning involve the pruning of the model before the fine- including magnitude-based pruning, loss-based pruning,
tuning stage. In contrast, downstream pruning methods are andregularization.
characterized by the simultaneous execution of pruning
1)Magnitude-basedPruning
alongside the fine-tuning process. Accordingly, upstream
Magnitude-based pruning, characterized by its simplic-
pruning retains the adaptability of the pruned model for
ityandefficacy,incorporatesthemagnitudesofweightsand
multiple tasks, ensuring its versatility. Conversely, down-
activation values into its pruning metrics. In this section
streampruningdirectstheprunedmodeltoconcentrateon
on magnitude-based pruning for medium-size language
aspecific,well-definedtask.
models, we find that all of the related methods exclusively
focusonthemagnitudesofweights.Consequently,wewill
introduce these magnitude-based pruning methods with
weights.
4.2 Pruning Methods for Medium-Size Language Mod- Magnitude Pruning [98], recognized as the most com-
els monly utilized pruning method, has been examined in the
contextofmedium-sizelanguagemodels[100],[101],[102],
Language models, such as GPT-2 and BERT, are initially [103]. Gordon et al. [100] conducted a study focusing on
trainedonextensivecorporaandexhibitapplicabilityacross thecompressionofBERTthroughMagnitudePruning.The
variousdownstreamtasksafterfine-tuning.Specifically,the findingsrevealthatapproximately30−40%oftheweights
pruning of language models distinguishes itself from the are non-essential and can be discarded without affecting
pruningmethodologiesemployedinConvolutionalNeural BERT’s performance. Furthermore, fine-tuning BERT for a
Networks(CNNs)orRecurrentNeuralNetworks(RNNs)in specific task does not contribute to an enhancement in the
three key aspects. First and foremost, the sheer magnitude ultimatelyachievablesparsityratio.ThisimpliesthatBERT
of parameters in language models surpasses that of CNNs can undergo pruning once during the pre-training phase,
or RNNs. For instance, the BERT-large model encompasses obviating the need for separate pruning for each task, all
335millionparameters,whereastheparametersofatypical while maintaining performance integrity. Based on this,
RNNareintherangeoftensofmillions[99].Theincreased Prune Once for All [104] is to prune models once for all
number of parameters amplifies the temporal and compu- tasksbeforefine-tuning.
tational demands of the fine-tuning phase. Consequently, Magnitudepruning,characterizedbythedirectpruning
language model pruning necessitates addressing the chal- ofthemodelsparsityratiotothetargetratio,mayresultina
lenges posed by this substantial parameter abundance. substantial deterioration of model performance. Compared
Secondly, language models have the potential to undergo toMagnitudePruning,GradualMagnitudePruning(GMP)
fine-tuning for a multitude of downstream tasks. Certain [105] introduces a sparsity ratio schedule, gradually reduc-
upstream pruning methodologies necessitate the retention ingthesparsityratiothroughoutthepruningprocess.Prune
of the language model’s capacity to function as a multi- OnceforAll[104]andGMP⋆[106]arebothimplementations
task solver. Thirdly, transformer-based language models of GMP specifically applied to language model pruning.
exhibit a distinctly different structural composition. Hence, Besides,GMP⋆introducesaninitialsubstantialpruningstep
inlightofthemodel’sarchitecture,certainstructuredprun- tobetteradapttoahightargetsparsity(e.g.,97%).Thisap-
ing methods may require reconfiguration to align with the proachallowsformorerecoverytimeinsubsequentpruning
structureofthemodel.Inconclusion,thereexistspecialized steps,ultimatelyleadingtoimprovedperformance,outper-
designsofpruningmethodologiesforlanguagemodelsthat forming most pruning methods including Prune Once for
are tailored to their unique characteristics, deviating from All[104].
conventionalpruningapproaches. 2)Loss-basedPruning
Wewillintroducethesepruningtechniquesformedium- While magnitude-based pruning is easy to implement,
size language models in the following, including ap- the magnitude alone may not accurately reflect the im-
proaches that are specially designed for Transformer-based portance of weights in some instances. The magnitude
models and generic to plenty of models with different of certain weights may be diminutive, yet their contribu-
architectures. In consideration of the fundamental features tion remainsessential [107]. Therefore,a morescientifically
of pruning methods (i.e., the determination of what to groundedapproachinvolvesassessingtheseweightswithin
pruneandhowtoprune),weshallintroducethesepruning the context of a specific task. The methods in this section
methods in the order of pruning unit and metric. Initially, adopttheloss-basedpruningstrategytailoredformedium-
weclassifypruningmethodsintotwoprimarycomponents: size language models. These approaches align with a more
unstructured and structured ones. Subsequently, based on nuanced evaluation based on the performance. Given that
thesequenceofpruningcriteria,wewillexpounduponeach the model’s training process is inherently geared towards
of the three pruning methods: magnitude-based pruning, minimizingthisloss,thelossundoubtedlystandsoutasthe
loss-basedpruning,andregularization. mostreliablemeasureofthemodel’sperformance.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 14
The first major category of loss-based pruning methods parameterswhileminimizingtheimpactonloss.Tostream-
integrates information about the gradients within the spe- linecalculations,bothmethodssimplifythecomputationof
cificmetrics.Theuniversalexpressionbywhichthesemeth- theHessianmatrixtosomeextent.However,OBDcomputes
ods evaluate the importance of weights can be articulated solely the diagonal entries of the Hessian matrix, whereas
throughthenegativegradient-weightproduct,expressedas OBSalsoconsiderstheimpactofoff-diagonalentries.These
follows: methodologies have served as inspiration for numerous
I=−w∇L(w) (17) subsequent approaches. The Optimal BERT Surgeon [116]
extends the principles of the OBS to the context of BERT,
The first interpretation of this expression pertains to the yieldingbetterresultswhencomparedtosomemagnitude-
weight change. The negative gradient direction of the basedpruningmethods[98],[104],[106]andthefirst-order
weights signifies the direction in which the weights are pruningmethods[108],[111].
intended to increase. Consequently, if the weight direction 3)Regularization
aligns with the direction of weight growth, it indicates In addition to the aforementioned methods, regular-
the importance of that weight in the specific task, as the ization techniques find many applications in medium-size
task necessitates the continued increase in its magnitude. language models. L 1 and L 2 regularization are popular
Alternatively, the second interpretation of this expression methods employed to counteract network overfitting. Both
canbesimplisticallyconceivedasthefirst-ordertermofthe introduce a regularization term into the loss function. Be-
Taylorexpansionoflossalteration,withhigher-orderterms sides,L 1regularizationhastheadditionaleffectofinducing
beingdisregarded. sparsity in weights. However, when it comes to directly
Many methods have implemented their improvements pruning the network, L 1 regularization is not always the
basedonthisuniversalexpression.MovementPruning[108] most suitable choice. This is attributed to the fact that
accumulates multiple updates of the negative gradient- L 1 regularization imposes more substantial penalties on
weight product. Accumulating such information aids in larger weights, deviating from the original pruning objec-
minimizing fluctuations during pruning. Among the first- tiveofeliminatingunimportantconnections,wheresmaller
order methods, Movement Pruning stands as a pioneering weightsareoftensituated.
one, upon which many extensions have been developed Instead,L 0 regularization[117]isamoreversatileprun-
[109], [110]. To mitigate the substantial variability and un- ingmethodthanL 1andL 2regularization.L 0regularization
certainty introduced by mini-batch sampling and intricate incorporates the L 0 norm of weights into the loss function.
training dynamics, PLATON [111] employs a weight prun- Similar to L 1 and L 2 regularization, L 0 regularization pe-
ing strategy that considers both the importance and uncer- nalizesnon-zeroweights.However,itdistinguishesitselfby
tainty associated with individual weights. The uncertainty applying equal penalties to all non-zero weights, aligning
originatesfromchangesinimportance.Toenhancestability, preciselywiththepruningobjectiveofequitablypenalizing
bothimportanceanduncertaintyundergoexponentialmov- alltheexistingconnections.
ing averaging. The final importance score of each weight Thetrainingobjectiveofthepruningprocessforallthree
is determined by the product of smoothed importance and of these regularizations can be expressed by the following
uncertainty. Parameter-efficient Sparse Training (PST) [112] formula:
andLoRAPrune[113]addthemagnitudeofweightandthe
a fic nc au lm imu pla ot re td ann ce ega scti ov re e.gradient-weightproducttoderivethe m w,i zn
N1 (cid:88)N
ℓ(w⊙z;(x i,y i))+λ∥w∥ p, (20)
i=1
The second major category of loss-based pruning meth-
ods integrates information about the second-order deriva- where λ represents the regularization factor, ∥w∥ p denotes
tive within the specific metrics. The variation of the loss, theL p normoftheweights,andzisabinarymaskindicat-
whenemployingtheTaylorexpansionandexpandingupto ing whether the weights are pruned. Consequently, the L 0
normoftheweightscanbeequivalentlyrepresentedbythe
the second-order term while neglecting higher orders, can
beexpressedinthefollowingmanner: summationofbinarymasks,i.e.,∥w∥ 0
=(cid:80)M
i=1z i.
However, the discrete nature of z poses challenges for
L(w)−L(w∗)≃(w−w∗)⊤∇L(w∗) efficient gradient-based optimization. To this end, the hard
1 (18) concrete distribution serves as an approximation to the
+ (w−w∗)⊤H (w∗)(w−w∗),
2 L binary masks, allocating approximately half of its mass
to {0, 1} and the remaining half to the interval (0, 1),
where H L(w∗) is the Hessian matrix. These methods are
thereby bridging the gap between discrete values 0 and 1
post-training pruning methods and always prune a well-
with continuous probability mass, as shown in Fig. 4. The
trained network w∗. Therefore, the gradient ∇L(w∗) can
formulationofthehardconcretedistributionisasfollows:
beneglected,gettingauniversalexpressiontorepresentthe
u∼U(0,1),
importanceofweights:
s=Sigmoid((logu−log(1−u)+logα)/β)
I= 1 2(w−w∗)⊤H L(w∗)(w−w∗). (19) s¯=s(ζ−γ)+γ, (21)
z =min(1,max(0,s¯)),
The Optimal Brain Damage (OBD) [114] and the Opti-
mal Brain Surgeon (OBS) [115] represent the second-order where U(·) is a uniform distribution, logα is the location
pruningapproachesinearlyworks.Bothofthemutilizethe parameter, β is the temperature parameter, (γ,ζ) is the
Hessianofthelossfunctiontoselectivelyeliminatespecific “stretch” interval with γ < 0 and ζ > 1. Given that the

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 15
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
                       
 ]
 \ W L V Q H '  \ W L O L E D E R U 3
 $ S S U R [ L P D W H  3 U R E D E L O L W \  ' H Q V L W \  + L V W R J U D P  R I  ]   0 R Q W H  & D U O R  factor. It can be seamlessly integrated with unstructured
 + L V W R J U D P  R I  ] pruning methods, providing the inference speedup that
pure unstructured methods may lack. For example, the
determination of the sparsity pattern can be initially pred-
icated on the magnitudes of the weights [120]. Serving as
agenericsparsitymethodology,2:4sparsitydemonstratesa
notable twofold acceleration in computational speed with-
outcompromisingperformance.
5)Discussion
Among all these unstructured pruning methods for
medium-size models, the Optimal BERT Surgeon [116]
demonstrates superior performance compared to various
magnitude-basedpruningmethods[98],[104],[106]andthe
first-order pruning methods [108], [111] in the conducted
Fig. 4: The approximate probability density histogram of experiments[106],[116].
hardconcretedistributionbyusingMonteCarlosimulation. Nonetheless, Magnitude Pruning [98] remains the most
Theparametersofthishardconcretedistributionarelogα= widely adopted pruning method. Because it is simple to
0,β = 0.5,γ = −0.1,andζ = 1.1.Underthisspecification implement, yet achieves competitive results with many
the hard concrete distribution assigns, roughly, half of its intricate methods [121]. Crucially, the pruning process of
massto{0,1}andtherestto(0,1). Magnitude Pruning operates independently of any specific
dataset, thereby addressing challenges in some scenarios
wheredatasetsmaybeunavailable.
reparameterized variable z is not strictly binary after train-
ing,manypruningmethodsadoptathresholdtodiscretize 4.2.2 StructuredPruningforMedium-SizeLanguageMod-
z into binary values in the end. For values of z below the els
threshold, the value is set to 0, while for values above the Indeed, numerous unstructured pruning methods have
threshold,thevalueissetto1. demonstratedthecapabilitytoachieveahighsparsityratio
While L 0 regularization finds broader applications in while maintaining performance levels comparable to their
pruning, L 1 regularization also has some pertinent use densecounterparts.However,it’snoteworthythatunstruc-
cases, and certain methods strive to enhance L 1 regular- tured sparse patterns do not necessarily lead to inference
ization. For example, Reweighted Proximal Pruning (RPP) speeduponnormalhardware.Consequently,thereisanin-
[118] builds upon L 1 regularization and introduces im- creasingfocusonresearchdedicatedtostructuredpruning.
provementsandrefinements.RPPcomprisesreweightedL
1 In the context of structured pruning methodologies ap-
regularization and the proximal operator. The reweighted plied to medium-size language models, the selection of
L 1 regularization dynamically reallocates penalty factors, appropriate pruning units assumes significance alongside
assigning greater penalties to weights approaching zero. the choice of pruning metric. Pruning units commonly
Theproximaloperatorfacilitatestheseparationofthespar- considered encompass attention heads, FFN neurons, hid-
sitypatternsearchandtheback-propagation-basedgradient den dimensions, and etc. Notably, employing architecture-
updateofthetrainingloss,enablinganeasiersparsepattern related structures as pruning units tends to yield more
search. favorable outcomes compared to structures unrelated to
4)Others modelarchitecture,suchasweightblocks.
Among the unstructured pruning methods discussed This observed superiority may be attributed to the
above, numerous approaches demonstrate an ability to preservation of fundamental principles inherent in the
uphold satisfactory model performance even with high model’s construction when reducing architecture-related
sparsity. However, they encounter challenges in achieving structures.Forinstance,afterthepruningofattentionheads,
efficientinferencespeedupduetotheirregularnatureofthe the resultant model retains the essential characteristics of a
sparsematricestheygenerate.Toaddressthispredicament, transformer-based model, featuring a reduced number of
unstructuredpruningmethodscanbeintegratedwithN:M attentionheads.
sparsity[119]. In the following, we will delve into the realm of struc-
The principle underlying N:M sparsity mandates that tured pruning, encompassing magnitude-based pruning,
within each group of M consecutive weights in the neural loss-basedpruning,andregularizationtechniques.
network, no more than N weights should exhibit non-zero 1)Magnitude-basedPruning
values. This implies that within each group of M consec- Intuitively, the aggregation of weight magnitudes for
utive weights, there are N −M weights with zero values. pruning units serves as a meaningful representation of
Thus the underlying hardware can compress the regularly importance, which is widely applicable to convolutional
occurring zero values within it. This kind of compression kernels in CNNs. Similarly, it can be extended to medium-
relies on unique architectures of the hardware, such as sizelanguagemodels.Forinstance,theweightmagnitudes
sparse tensor cores. For instance, the Nvidia Ampere A100 could be aggregated with L 2 norm to represent the corre-
is equipped with sparse tensor cores to accelerate the 2:4 spondingimportanceinattentionheads,FFNneurons[122],
sparsity. and weight blocks [123]. The less important structures are
For N:M sparsity, the pruning metric is not a restricted thenremovedbasedontheorderoftheirimportancescores.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 16
2)Loss-basedPruning technique. The main variability among these L 0 regular-
Within loss-based pruning methodologies, considerable ization methods resides in their respective approaches to
attention has been directed towards the exploration and the selection of pruning units. Voita et al. [129] introduced
analysis of attention heads [124], [125], [126], [127]. This L 0 regularization to attention head pruning, specifically
focus emanates from their proclivity to become redundant, selecting a subset of attention heads. McCarley et al. [140]
andthattherestoftheheadsfrequentlycoulddemonstrate incorporatedL 0regularizationtopruneattentionheadsand
an aptitude for assuming the functional roles previously FFN neurons. Factorized Low-rank Pruning (FLOP) [141]
carriedoutbytheprunedheads.Micheletal.[124]proposed integrates Low-Rank Factorization with L 0 regularization.
an iterative pruning approach based on head importance Thismethodologyinvolvesthereparameterizationandfac-
scores. The attention heads are covered with binary mask torization of the matrix W into the product of two smaller
variables. Thus, the head importance scores are computed matrices, denoted as W = PQ, where p and q represent
k k
through the examination of gradients on the binary mask the k-th column of P and k-th row of Q respectively. The
variables.Theresultsindicatedthat20-40%ofheadsTrans- pruningunitisthecombinationofp andq .Additionally,
k k
former heads could be pruned without significantly com- anaugmentedLagrangianmethodisintroducedtoregulate
promisingtestaccuracyonthetargettask. the sparsity ratio in the context of FLOP. Coarse- and Fine-
However, Differentiable Subset Pruning (DSP) [125] grained Pruning (CoFi) [142] jointly prunes coarse-grained
demonstrated that Michel et al. [124] significantly under- and fine-grained modules using L 0 regularization, includ-
estimated the number of Transformer heads that could be ing attention and FFN layers, individual attention heads,
pruned.TheexperimentsshowedthatDSPcouldpruneup FFN neurons, and hidden dimensions for Transformer-
to 90% of heads without causing much degradation in test basedmodels.Notably,themaskoverthehiddendimension
performance. (Pruning up to 90% of heads means around issharedacrossallTransformerlayersandanaugmentedla-
20%ofthemodelsizeshrinkageastheparametersofheads grangianmethodisadapted.Bycombiningwithalayerwise
are just part of the whole model.) DSP treats Transformer distillationapproach,CoFiachievesmodelswithmorethan
head pruning as a subset selection problem. To ensure the 10× speedups while exhibiting only a marginal decrease in
differentiability of the subset pruner, the Gumbel–Softmax accuracyintheconductedexperiments.
trick[128]anditsextensiontosubsetselectionisappliedto In addition to L 0 regularization, L 1 regularization also
DSP. The results indicated superior accuracy and inference gets relevant research. SIMPLE [143] introduces L 1 regu-
speedup of DSP compared to other head pruning methods larization to structured pruning, encompassing attention
[124],[129]. heads, intermediate neurons of the FFN, and the hidden
In addition to attention head pruning, Block Move- dimension as compressible components. The mask over
ment Pruning [130] is a block pruning method. It extends the hidden dimension is shared across layers, akin to the
structured methods by considering blocks of any size and approach employed in CoFi [142]. Through the learning of
integratesthesestructuresintotheMovementPruning[108]. masks for these compressible components via a sparsity-
The matrix within the model undergoes partitioning into induced objective, various-sized pruned models can be
fixed-sized blocks, with larger block sizes yielding greater obtained. These pruned models can subsequently be fine-
inference speedup. Furthermore, the combination of this tunedwithacausaldistillationobjectivetoenhanceperfor-
approachwiththepruningofneuronsintheFFNsresultsin mance.
the best overall performance. Similarly, numerous method- 4)Others
ologies prune neurons in the FFNs and attention heads Beyondtheclassificationbasedonmetrics,certainstruc-
simultaneously[131],[132],[133],[134],[135],[136]. tured pruning methods exhibit notable similarities when
In addition to the above methods designed for the theirdesignatedpruningunitsareidentical.
Transformer structures, some structured pruning methods The first class among other structured pruning is layer
can be generalized because the pruning units in them are pruning [144], [145], [146]. The aforementioned pruning
neurons [137], [138], [139]. For instance, Low-Rank and units,suchasattentionheadsandneurons,arecharacterized
Sparse approximation (LoSparse) [137] prunes the weight by their relatively diminutive scale, necessitating a more
matrix in neuron level (i.e., the columns of weight matrix). detailed pruning scheme to determine which should be
Considering the sensitivity of parameters defined in PLA- pruned.Conversely,whendealingwithsubstantiallylarger
TON[111],theimportanceofeachneuronisdefinedbythe pruning units, such as entire layers, numerous methodolo-
cumulativesensitivityofparameterswithinagivencolumn. gies tend to engage in direct experimentation with multi-
3)Regularization ple pruning schemes before determining the most effective
In addition to the loss-based pruning methods, regu- network configuration. This practice stems from the lower
larization methods constitute another category within the testingcostsassociatedwithasmallernumberoflayers.
spectrum of structured pruning techniques applicable to In addition to layer pruning, there is a body of re-
medium-size language models. Diverging from unstruc- searchdedicatedtotokenpruning[147],[148],[149],which
turedpruningapproaches,theregularizationterminstruc- does not alter the underlying network architecture. Token
tured pruning encompasses binary masks associated with pruning involves the removal of unimportant tokens from
specific structural components, as opposed to individual a sequence during inference to reduce computational re-
weights. Except for the pruning units, other details closely quirements. Learned Token Pruning (LTP) [148] represents
resemblethoseinunstructuredpruning. a straightforward and effective approach to adaptively re-
Nevertheless, among these regularization methods, L 0 move unimportant tokens as an input sequence traverses
regularizationstandsoutasthemostextensivelyemployed through transformer layers. The pruning metric for each

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 17
token is determined by the sum of normalized attention These unstructured pruning methods require minimal
probabilityfromtheTransformerblock. calibrationdata.Theminimalcalibrationdataisforasingle
Extending beyond the pruning units previously men- forward pass of the model, specifically aiming at acquiring
tioned, structured pruning encompasses a myriad of di- activationvaluesorgradientstocalculatetheimportanceof
verseunits.Forinstance,Spectral-NormalizedIdentityPrior weights,whichremainsacontributingfactortotheoutcome
(SNIP) [150] employs a strategy to prune attention and ofthepruning[166].
FFN sublayers by transforming residual connections into In the following, we will introduce these unstructured
strict identity mappings. SNIP sets specific thresholds for pruning methods in LLMs in the order of pruning met-
activation vectors, and those falling below the thresholds rics.Inthisinvestigation,noregularization-relatedmethods
result in the pruning of residual blocks (i.e., the attention have been identified, thus this section will be divided into
andFFNsublayers). introductionsofmethodsbasedonmagnitudeandmethods
basedonloss.
1)Magnitude-basedPruning
4.3 PruningMethodsforLLMs
When directly applying Magnitude Pruning [98] to
In the last section, we introduced the pruning methods for LLMs, the outcomes are not very competitive even with
medium-sizelanguagemodelswithparametersnumbering parameter-efficientfine-tuningstrategies[167],[168].There-
less than 1 billion. Most of these methods adopt full fine- fore, in magnitude-based pruning methods, compared to
tuningafterpruningtoimprovetheperformance.However, only using the magnitude of weights as the pruning met-
as the parameters increase, full fine-tuning becomes more ric in medium-size language models, more magnitude-
difficult or even infeasible. This discrepancy underscores based pruning methods in LLMs combine the magnitude
a significant challenge in the field of research dedicated of weights and activate values as the pruning metric. For
to pruning techniques tailored specifically for LLMs. To instance, Wanda [151] and RIA [152] use the magnitude of
handle this problem, on the one hand, certain pruning weight and activation metric. In addition to the magnitude
methodologiesopttoincorporateparameter-efficienttuning ofweightandactivation,E-Sparse[153]alsointroducesthe
techniques to reduce fine-tuning costs. On the other hand, informationentropyintothemetric.
alternative approaches abandon the fine-tuning process, Wanda(PruningbyWeightsandactivations)[151]intro-
relying on an optimized pruning procedure will inherently duces a novel pruning metric, considering both the magni-
lead to retained model performance. The viability of these tude of weights and activate values. The motivation is that
alternativeapproachesispartlyattributedtothehugenum- thesignificanceofweightsshouldnotsolelybeevaluatedin
ber of parameters in LLMs. The higher number implies a isolationbutratherinconsiderationofitsproductwiththe
higherlikelihoodofredundancywithinthemodel. corresponding activation value. To illustrate, let’s consider
In this section, we will introduce the pruning methods a fully connected layer with weights represented by W
forLLMs,mirroringthesequenceestablishedinthesection with dimensions (C out,C in). In the context of language
devoted to pruning methods for medium-size language models, this linear layer receives input activation X with
models. Pruning methods for LLMs adhere to a parallel dimensions(N ×L,C in),whereN andLdenotethebatch
approach to those employed for medium-size language and sequence dimensions respectively. For each weight, its
models,withsomedistinctionsincertainmethodsprimarily importanceisquantifiedastheproductofitsmagnitudeand
arising in omitting the fine-tuning process. To facilitate thecorrespondinginputfeaturenorm.Concretely,thescore
a more comprehensive comparison of these methods, we S ij fortheweightW ij isdefinedas:
consolidatethecharacteristicsofthesepruningmethods,as
showninTABLE3. S ij =|W ij|·∥X j∥ 2, (22)
where∥X j∥
2
evaluatestheL
2
normofj-thfeaturesaggre-
4.3.1 UnstructuredPruningforLLMs gatedacrossN×Ldifferenttokens.Remarkably,theresults
Attributed to the greater capacity of unstructured pruning indicate that Wanda achieves comparable performance to
methodstopreservemodelperformancecomparedtostruc- SparseGPTbutinasignificantlyshortertime.
tured alternatives, all of the unstructured pruning method- Similar to Wanda [151], RIA (Relative Importance and
ologies in this section for LLMs adopt an approach of Activations) [152] also jointly considers the weight and
eschewingthefine-tuningprocessasshowninTABLE3.The activation. The primary distinction lies in its approach to
experiments have demonstrated that these methodologies alleviating channel corruption (i.e., the rows and columns
can attain a sparsity ratio of 50% with a relatively modest of the weight matrix pruned integrally). RIA replaces the
compromiseinmodelperformance. magnitude of weights with relative importance. This rela-
The two pioneer unstructured pruning methods for tiveimportanceiscalculatedasthemagnitudeofindividual
LLMsareSparseGPT[154]andWanda[151],whichbecome weights divided by the sum of the magnitude of weights
the baselines for many subsequent methods for compari- in their corresponding row and column. Therefore, the
son.Thesubsequentunstructuredpruningmethodsdemon- comparison among different rows and columns becomes
stratetheircapabilitytooutperformSparseGPTandWanda relativelyequitablebyutilizingtherelativeimportance,mit-
acrossvariousNLPtasks,therebyattainingsuperiorresults. igatingpotentialbiasesintroducedbythevariationsintheir
Thoughunstructuredpruningmethodsgethardlyinference magnitudes. RIA can be further combined with channel
speedup, they can easily be combined with N:M sparsity permutation,whichmaximallypreservesimportantweights
[119] to accelerate inference speed, which is also experi- under N:M sparsity to get practical speed-up on specific
mentedinSparseGPTandWanda. hardware.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 18
TABLE3:AsummaryofvariouspruningmethodsforLLMs.
Methods Unit Metric Iterative/One-shot Finetuning Global/Local
Wanda[151] Unstructured Magnitude-based One-shot No Local
RIA[152] Unstructured Magnitude-based One-shot No Local
E-Sparse[153] Unstructured Magnitude-based One-shot No Local
SparseGPT[154] Unstructured Loss-based One-shot No Local
ISC[155] Unstructured Loss-based One-shot No Local
GBLM-Pruner[156] Unstructured Loss-based One-shot No Local
PGZ[157] Unstructured Loss-based One-shot No Local
FLAP[158] Structured Magnitude-based One-shot No Global
SliceGPT[159] Structured Magnitude-based One-shot PEFT Local
LLM-Pruner[160] Structured Loss-based One-shot PEFT Global
LoRAShear[161] Structured Loss-based Iterative PEFT Global
APT[162] Structured Loss-based Iterative PEFT Global
ShearedLLaMA[163] Structured Regularization One-shot Yes Local
Compresso[164] Structured Regularization Neither PEFT Global
LLMSurgeon[165] Both Loss-based Iterative PEFT Global
In addition to the magnitude of weight and activation ImprovedSaliencyCriterion(ISC).ISCisdevisedbyadding
asWandaandRIA,E-Sparse(Entropy-basedSparsity)[153] the metrics derived from OBS and OBD directly. This new
introduces information entropy from hidden state features metric aims to provide a comprehensive and refined as-
intothepruningmetric.Theentropyservesasameasureof sessment of the importance of model parameters for the
information richness, with higher values indicating richer pruning process. In addition to proposing ISC, Shao et al.
information. Consequently, entropy is incorporated along- put forward to allocate sparsity ratio individually to each
side standard weight magnitude and input feature norm matrix. In this way, pruning targets are selected adaptively
in the pruning metric, enhancing the evaluation of channel withineachweightmatrix.
informationactivation. In addition to the aforementioned second-order meth-
2)Loss-basedPruning ods, there has been corresponding research into first-
In loss-based approaches, it is observed that the prun- ordermethods[156],[157].Gradient-basedLanguageModel
ing metrics involve the first or second-order derivatives of Pruner (GBLM-Pruner) [156] is a first-order pruning
weightswithrespecttotheloss.Thesecond-ordermethods method.Theimportanceofweightsisdefinedbytheprod-
discussed in this subsection are all inspired by two earlier uct with the magnitude of weights and the normalization
second-orderloss-basedpruningmethods,namely,Optimal of the corresponding gradients across different samples,
Brain Damage (OBD) [114] and Optimal Brain Surgeon which can be seen as an extension of the traditional first-
(OBS)[115]. order method (i.e., gradient-weight product). Furthermore,
SparseGPT[154],asecond-orderpruningmethod,incor- the feature activations can be integrated into the pruning
porates OBS [115] technique into the GPT-family models. metrictoenhanceperformance.
It is the first pruning method that works efficiently at
models with 10-100+ billion parameters. The SparseGPT 4.3.2 StructuredPruningforLLMs
pruning methodology is delineated by two main compo- In contrast to unstructured pruning, structured pruning is
nents: mask selection and weight reconstruction processes. not constrained by hardware limitations, enabling the real-
Initially, the mask selection identifies weights for pruning ization of inference acceleration on conventional hardware
basedonametric,suchasweightmagnitude.Subsequently, following the pruning process. However, these methods
theunprunedweightsundergooptimizationusingtheOBS might result in more performance degradation than un-
method to reconstruct the compressed model (i.e., update structuredonesduetothealterationofnetworkstructures,
the remaining parameters) to compensate for the pruned necessitating a fine-tuning process to recover performance.
weights.ThepruningprocedureinSparseGPTrequiresmin- Therefore, while fine-tuning is abandoned in unstructured
imal calibration data. These data undergo a single forward pruning for LLMs, it is widely employed in structured
propagation, during which the unpruned weights are up- pruning for LLMs but in a parameter-efficient way. Similar
dated only once. The results of this approach demonstrate to unstructured pruning, structured pruning for LLMs has
that LLMs can be compressed to high sparsity through its pioneer method, LLM-Pruner [160], which serves as a
weight pruning in a single pass, without necessitating baselineforsubsequentmethodsandfacilitatesmeaningful
the fine-tuning process. Importantly, this compression is comparisons.
achievedwithalowlossofaccuracy,asassessedbyperplex- The discussion of these structured pruning methods for
ity and zero-shot performance metrics. Similarly, the LLM LLMs will be presented in the following section. Similarly,
Surgeon [165] extents OBS but is generic for unstructured we will introduce these structured pruning methods in
andstructuredpruning. LLMsintheorderofpruningmetrics,includingmagnitude-
Building upon the concepts of OBS and OBD, Shao et basedpruning,loss-basedpruning,andregularization.
al. [155] introduced a novel pruning metric termed the 1)Magnitude-basedPruning

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 19
Magnitude-based pruning methods for LLMs consider structures.Thisisachievedthroughtheprojectionofredun-
rows or columns as pruning units [158], [159], [169]. For dantstructuresontozero,transferringtheknowledgetothe
instance, the pruning units of FLuctuation-based Adaptive crucialstructures.
Structured Pruning (FLAP) [158] are columns. The impor- In contrast to the manual design of pruning features,
tance score of each column of the weight matrix is mea- Ji et al. [170] proposed a novel approach by employing
suredbythe”fluctuationmetric”.Thismetricisthesample a non-neural model, specifically a gradient boosting de-
variance of each input feature which is weighted with the cision tree (GBDT), as an accuracy predictor. The use of
squared norm of the corresponding column of the weight this accuracy predictor enables further optimization of the
matrix. Furthermore, in its pursuit to obviate the necessity searchspaceandsearchprocessforidentifyingtheoptimal
forfine-tuning,FLAPincorporatesbiascompensationmech- pruned model automatically. By training the GBDT as an
anisms aimed at mitigating the adverse effects stemming accuracypredictor,themodelgainstheabilitytoassessand
fromtheremovalofcomponents. predicttheimpactofdifferentpruningconfigurationsonthe
2)Loss-basedPruning accuracy of the neural network, facilitating more efficient
In the realm of loss-based structured pruning methods andautomatedselectionoftheoptimalprunedmodel.
appliedtoLLMs,gradientsremainpivotalinformation,akin 3)Regularization
to their significance in medium-size models. The following In the context of regularization methods applied to
methodsutilizegradientinformationindifferentways[160], LLMs, contemporary approaches predominantly adhere to
[161], [162], [170], such as defining pruning structures, se- theprinciplesestablishedforearliermedium-sizelanguage
lectingpruningtargets,andetc.Themostnotabledeparture models, incorporating some generic refinements and opti-
of these methods from traditional approaches lies in their mizations.
avoidanceofpredefinedpruningunits(e.g.,attentionheads, Sheared LLaMA [163] can be viewed as an extension
neurons).Instead,someofthesemethodsdynamicallyiden- of CoFi [142]. This approach involves the joint pruning of
tifyanddesignatepruningunits. coarse-grained and fine-grained modules in Transformer-
For instance, LLM-Pruner [160] removes non-critical based models using L 0 regularization. The modules sub-
coupled structures during the pruning process. These cou- jectedtopruningincludelayers,individualattentionheads,
pled structures are automatically identified and extracted FFN neurons, and hidden dimensions as in CoFi. Sheared
throughthedefinitionofstructuredependency(i.e.,connec- LLaMA introduces two novel and significant components.
tion dependencies between neurons). A coupled structure The first component is targeted structured pruning, which
comprisesagroupofweights.Theimportanceofindividual framespruningasaconstrainedoptimizationproblem.This
weightsisformulatedasthechangeinloss,expandedusing formulation aims to learn pruning masks that search for
Taylor expansion to the second order. The diagonal of the a subnetwork matching a pre-specified target architecture
Hessianmatrixinthesecond-ordertermisapproximatedby while maximizing performance. The second component is
theFisherinformationmatrixusingfirst-orderinformation. dynamic batch loading, a strategy that loads training data
Ultimately, the importance of a group of weights is aggre- from each domain in proportion to its rate of loss reduc-
gatedthroughsummation,production,orothermethodsto tion. This approach efficiently utilizes data and accelerates
determinethegroup’soverallimportance.Afterevaluating overallperformanceimprovementduringtraining.Inafull-
theimportanceofeachgroup,thosewithlowerimportance resource setup, Sheared LLaMA achieves compact counter-
are pruned based on a predefined pruning ratio. The fine- parts that outperform models of equal sizes trained from
tuning process in LLM-Pruner applies some parameter- scratch.
efficient tuning techniques, such as LoRA. This facilitates Compresso[164]integratesLoRAintotheL 0regulariza-
rapid and effective fine-tuning of pruned models using a tion. The L 0 regularization is employed to optimize binary
small amount of data. The experimental results showcase masksthatcovermodulesincludingheads,FFNintermedi-
that when 20% of the parameters are removed, the pruned ateneurons,andhiddendimensions.Simultaneously,model
modelmaintainstheperformanceofthemajorityoftheorig- parameters are updated through LoRA in the instruction
inal model. However, a more aggressive pruning strategy, tuning process. An innovative aspect of Compresso is the
involvingtheremovalof50%oftheparameters,resultsina introductionofacollaborativepruningparadigmwherethe
substantialdeclineinmodelperformance.Thisobservation pruningalgorithmandtargetLLMworktogetherthrougha
also underscores the difficulty of achieving high sparsity collaborativeprompttolearntheoptimalpruningdecisions
ratiosthroughstructuredpruningwhilemaintainingmodel duringtheinstructiontuningprocess.Thepromptexplains
performance. the concept of pruning and its purpose, informs the LLM
Similar to LLM-Pruner, LoRAShear [161] discovers the that it is undergoing pruning, and encourages the LLM
minimalremovalstructuresinthedependencygraph.How- to better adapt to the pruning process. By incorporating
ever,LoRAShearspecificallyconstructsdependencygraphs this informative prompt, Compresso aims to enhance the
over LoRA modules, considering their learnable nature. LLM’sunderstandingandcooperationduringpruning,con-
The analysis of knowledge distribution is then utilized to tributing to improved performance and adaptation to the
identify crucial structures, marking them as unprunable. modifiedmodelstructure.
A distinctive feature of LoRAShear is the introduction of
4.4 OtherTopicsforLLMpruning
LoRA Half-Space Projected Gradient (LHSPG) for progres-
sivestructuredpruning.LHSPGleveragesinformationfrom 4.4.1 EnhancingPruningEfficacyforLLMs
LoRAmodulestoidentifyandremoveredundantstructures Several auxiliary techniques have been developed to en-
while preserving the knowledge stored in the important hance the efficacy of pruning methods tailored for LLMs,

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 20
including the sparsity ratios tailored for subregions [171], 5 KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION
[172], post-pruning fine-tuning methods [89], [167], [173],
Knowledge Distillation (KD) is a common technique for
[174], [175], and hardware optimization [176], [177] While
compressing and speeding up models. The specific im-
not constituting a novel pruning method, these auxiliary
plementation process involves transferring the knowledge
techniques can readily be integrated with existing pruning
acquiredbyacomplexteachermodeltoasimplerstudentmodel,
methodsforLLMstoenhanceoverallpruningoutcomes.
therebyenablingamoreconciseandefficientrepresentation
One such method of tailored sparsity ratios is Outlier
oftheteachermodel’sknowledge.
Weighed Layerwise sparsity (OWL) [171]. The experiments
InSection5.1,wewillintroducesomefundamentalcon-
in OWL indicate that the appropriate layerwise sparsity
ceptsofknowledgedistillationandprovideabriefclassifica-
ratios have a strong correlation with the emergence of
tion of knowledge distillation methods. Then we will sum-
outliers. Therefore, the sparsity ratio of OWL is directly
marize various knowledge distillation methods employing
proportionaltotheoutlierratioobservedwithineachlayer.
medium-size language models (the language models with
Consequently, in contrast to the prevailing LLM pruning
around1billionparameters)inSection5.2,andwewillclas-
strategies that uniformly apply sparsity levels across all
sifythemintothreegroupsbasedonwhetherdistillationoc-
layers, OWL introduces a customized set of non-uniform
curs during the pretraining phase, the finetuning phase, or
layerwisesparsityratios.Anotherapproachofpost-pruning
both. We finally provide a detailed overview of knowledge
fine-tuning methods is Dynamic Sparse No Training [174],
distillationforlargelanguagemodels(thelanguagemodels
which introduces a training-free fine-tuning method for
withover1billionparameters),categorizingthemasblack-
sparseLLMs.ThisallowsforslightupdatestosparseLLMs,
boxdistillationandwhite-boxdistillationinSection5.3.
enablingfurtherrefinementwithouttheneedforacomplete
fine-tuning process. Without the expensive backpropaga-
tion, Dynamic Sparse No Training minimizes the recon- 5.1 BasicConcepts
struction error between the dense and sparse LLMs, in the Understanding the core of knowledge distillation involves
fashionofperformingiterativeweightpruningandgrowing answering three questions: what is knowledge, between
ontopofsparseLLMs. whom is knowledge transmitted, and how is knowledge
The experimental results demonstrate that these tech- transmitted. Knowledge, in simple terms, is summarized
niquescansignificantlyimprovetheperformanceofexisting astheabilitiesthemodelspossess(classification,reasoning,
pruning methods, such as Wanda and SparseGPT. These etc). In the distillation process, the source of knowledge is
findings suggest that the potential enhancements to the the teacher model, and the recipient of knowledge is the
performance of pruning can be achieved through various student model. In other words, a well-trained teacher is
meansunrelatedtothecoresofthepruningmethods. essential, and our goal is to enable the student to acquire
orreinforcetheabilitiestheteacherpossesses.However,the
key lies in how knowledge is transmitted. The pioneers of
4.4.2 FutureWorksofPruningforLLMs
knowledgedistillation,Hiltonetal.[178],firstusedtheout-
While the field of pruning for LLMs has yielded fruitful putsoftheteacherandstudent’ssoftmaxlayerstotransmit
results, it continues to grapple with significant challenges. knowledge. They designed the following loss function to
Twoprimaryissuesstandoutasparticularlycrucial. train the student model, thereby achieving the transfer of
knowledge:
Firstly,theintegrationofpruningwithothermethodolo-
gies, such as quantization [154] and knowledge distillation L=α·L D(p(z t,T),p(z s,T))+(1−α)·L S(y,p(z s,T)) (23)
[163], is essential for achieving competitive performance.
Relative to the achievements of pruning in the domain of where L D(p(z t,T),p(z s,T)) represents the difference in
visual models in the past, the current outcomes in LLM output of the softmax layers between the student and
pruningarecomparativelylesssatisfactory.Therefore,apiv- teacher, L S(y,p(z s,T)) represents the difference between
otal challenge lies in augmenting the inherent effectiveness the output of the student’s softmax layers and the ground-
ofthepruning method,ensuringitsproficiencyevenwhen truth labels. Both of them utilize the cross-entropy loss. α
employedindependently. representstheweightcoefficient,andthespecificexpression
Secondly, the fine-tuning cost is a significant challenge forp i isasfollows:
in the pruning of LLMs. Many pruning methods for LLMs
exp(z /T)
adopt one-shot pruning without fine-tuning to minimize p i = Σ exp(i z /T) (24)
the computational burden. Alternatively, some approaches j j
incorporateparameter-efficienttuningtechniquestoreduce where T is employed to amplify the impact of incorrect
trainingcosts.However,suchstrategiesinevitablycompro- labels on the transmission of knowledge, thereby enabling
mise the performance of the pruned model. Researchers thestudentmodeltoacquiremoreknowledgefromasingle
and practitioners in the field must persist in addressing sample.
the challenge of the inability to execute full fine-tuning, Subsequent researchers have employed a variety of
particularlywhendealingwithLLMsaimingtoenhancethe methods to achieve knowledge transfer, primarily falling
performanceofpruning. into the following four categories: logit-based KD, feature-
Inconclusion,addressingthesechallengesisimperative based KD, relation-based KD and black-box KD. In Fig. 5,
for advancing the effectiveness and practicality of pruning wealsoprovideabriefoverviewofthesedistillationmeth-
techniques. odsandtheirrelationships.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 21
betweenoutputsfordifferentsamples.Thegeneralformof
Prediction Black-box KD Prediction
itslossfunctionisasfollows:
Output Layer Logit-based KD Output Layer L response =L((f t(t i,t j),f s(s i,s j)) (27)
Hint Layer N Hint Layer M where t i, t j and s i, s j are feature representations from the
… … teacher model and the student model. They can represent
outputsfromdifferentlayersoroutputsfromdifferentsam-
Hint Layer 3 Matrix T Matrix S Hint Layer 3 ples.f t(·)andf s(·)representthesimilarityfunctions.
Relation-based KD For example, FSP [181] uses feature maps of the same
Hint Layer 2 Hint Layer 2
size as feature representations, and employs Gram matrix
andMSEasf(·)andL(·).
Hint Layer 1 Feature-based KD Hint Layer 1
4) Black-box KD. The three distillation methods men-
Input Layer Input Layer tioned above rely on the premise that internal information
White-box KD
of the teacher model is accessible, so they all fall under
Input Input thecategoryofwhite-boxdistillation(distillationmethodthat
Teacher Student requiresaccesstointernaldataoftheteachermodelduring
thetrainingprocess).However,manycontemporaryclosed-
Fig.5:Taxonomyofknowledgedistillation
source large models have inaccessible internal information,
and we can only obtain the model’s predictions. The distil-
lation pattern where knowledge is transmitted through the
1) Logit-based KD. As the name suggests, logit-based
predictions of the teacher model is referred to as black-box
KD is a distillation paradigm that involves the transfer of
knowledgedistillation.
knowledgeusingthelogitsfromtheteachermodel.Wecan
write down the general form of the logit-based knowledge
5.2 KDforMedium-SizeLanguageModels
distillationlossfunction:
With the emergence of the transformer architecture, var-
L logit =L(p(z t),p(z s)) (25) ious medium-size language models based on the trans-
former structure (e.g. BERT, GPT-2, etc), have been pro-
whereL(·)indicatesthecross-entropyloss[178],Kullback-
posed. These language models are trained through two
Leiblerdivergence(KLD)loss[179]andsoon.
training processes: pretraining and finetuning. Specifically,
Clearly,Hiltonetal.’smethodisaexampleoflogit-based in the pretraining phase, we train the model on a large-
knowledgedistillation. scale unlabeled dataset to learn the general features and
2) Feature-based KD. Due to the limited knowledge ac- structure of language. Subsequently, during the finetuning
quired by the student in logit-based knowledge distilla- process, we further train the model on labeled data to
tion, researchers aim for better emulation of the teacher’s adapt it to the specific features and requirements of the
behavior. Hence, they introduced feature-based knowledge giventask.Consequently,unlikepreviousdistillationmeth-
distillation. Specifically, this involves matching the outputs ods, distillation for these models is categorized into two
ofintermediatelayersinboththestudentandteachermod- classes: finetuning distillation and pretraining distillation.
els, requiring the student not only to know the results but Thestudentmodelcanreceiveknowledgetransmittedfrom
alsotounderstandtheunderlyingprocesses.Thefollowing the pretrained teacher during the pretraining period or
is the general form of the loss function for feature-based from the teacher fine-tuned for a specific task during the
knowledgedistillation: finetuning period. We will separately introduce these two
distillation paradigms. Additionally, we have created the
L feature =L((f t(x),r(f s(x))) (26) Table 4 to illustrate the training stage, knowledge source
andlossfunctionforvariousmedium-sizemodeldistillation
where f t(·) and f s(·) represent the feature maps of the methodsmentionedbelow.
teacher model and the student model. L(·) is the function
usedtofitfeatures,andr(·)isappliedtomakefeaturemaps 5.2.1 FinetuningDistillation
of the teacher model and the student model have the same Finetuning distillation is primarily aimed at compressing
shape. models for specific tasks. Generally, teachers in finetun-
For example, FitNet [180] leverages feature maps from ing distillation are models that have been fine-tuned for
intermediatelayersofboththeteacherandstudentmodels specific tasks. For example, Distilled BiLSTM [182] is the
to adjust the parameters of the student model. It also uses earliest method to employ knowledge distillation on BERT.
meansquarederror(MSE)alongwithalearnablematrixas It transfers the knowledge of fine-tuned BERT to BiLSTM
L(·)andr(·). bylearningfromlogits.Therefore,thisisasuccessfulimple-
3) Relation-based KD. Furthermore, researchers aim for mentationoflogit-basedknowledgedistillationonmedium-
the student to learn how the teacher handles relationships size models. Subsequently, many feature-based knowledge
between different data, leading to the proposal of relation- distillations [183], [184] have also been implemented on
basedknowledgedistillation.Thisrelationshipisprimarily medium-sizemodels.Theydistillknowledgeintheembed-
manifestedintwoaspects:therelationshipbetweenoutputs ding layer, transformer layers, and prediction layer, allow-
atdifferentlayersforthesamesampleandtherelationship ing the student model to learn the knowledge mastered

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 22
TABLE 4: A summary of various KD methods for BERT. Embed., Attn., Hidden., and Pred. represent knowledge is from
embeddings,attentions,hiddenlayers,andmodel’sprediction,repectively.
KDMethod Trainingstage Embed. Attn. Hidden. Pred. NewKnowledgeSource
DistilledBiLSTM[182] Finetuning MSE
PKD[183] Finetuning MSE CE
DynaBERT[184] Finetuning MSE MSE CE
Metadistil[185] Finetuning CE
AD-KD[186] Finetuning CE Attributionmap(MSE)
AdaBERT[187] Finetuning CE CE Modelefficiency
MixKD[188] Finetuning CE MixUpdata(CE/MSE)
Meta-KD[189] Finetuning MSE MSE MSE CE Transferrableknowledge(MSE)
ReAugKD[190] Finetuning CE Similaritymatrix(KL)
DistilBERT[191] Pretraining COS CE
MiniLM[192] Pretraining KL Value-relation(KL)
MobileBERT[193] Pretraining KL MSE MSE
HomoBERT[194] Pretraining MSE MSE MSE KL
TinyBERT[195] Finetuningandpretraining MSE MSE MSE CE
TED[196] FinetuningorPretraining KL Filters(MSE)
by the teacher model from various aspects. For example, operationalfeasibility,butTurcetal.[197]hasdemonstrated
PKD[183]introducedahiddenstateloss.Itselectsasubset thatsimplepretrainingdistillationmethodsresultinsignif-
of outputs from the intermediate transformer blocks of icant distillation losses. Therefore, the effectiveness of the
both the teacher and student for distillation. Additionally, student models distilled using these methods may not be
it designed two alignment modes, namely PKD-Skip (the ideal. Besides, some methods [185], [186] have not been
studentlearnsfromeveryklayersoftheteacher)andPKD- utilizedinpretrainingdistillation.Theapplicabilityofthese
Last(thestudentlearnsfromthelastklayersoftheteacher), methodstopretrainingdistillationremainstobeexplored.
with experimental evidence demonstrating the superiority
Considering the fact that finetuning distillation is tai-
of the former. DynaBERT [184] also takes into account the
loredforspecifictasks,manyothermethodsalsoutilizepro-
widthofthemodel,anditincorporatestheideaofpruning.
prietary knowledge sources, enabling students to acquire
To be specific, It sets a parameter, the width multiplier
knowledgethesespecifictasksneedfromtheteachermodel
m w ∈ (0,1), and retains the most important m w attention more efficiently. So, these methods cannot be applied to
heads in the Multi-Head Attention (MHA) layer of the
pretrainingdistillation.
transformer, as well as the most important m w neurons in
the Feed-Forward Network (FFN), to initialize the student For instance, AdaBERT [187] employs a search space to
model DynaBERT w. Then it transfers knowledge from the enable adaptive changes in the student’s structure. Specifi-
teachermodeltothewidth-adaptiveDynaBERT w through cally,thesearchspaceconsistsofmultiplelayers,witheach
the embedding layer, hidden states, and the prediction layer comprising input nodes, output nodes, and hidden
layer.Followingthat,ituniformlyselectstransformerlayers internalnodesthatformadirectedgraph.Theedgesofthis
from DynaBERT w using the depth multiplier m d (similar graphrepresentcandidateoperationsselectedfromaseries
to PKD-skip) to initialize the student model DynaBERT. of lightweight operations based on CNN. Considering the
Knowledge is then transferred from DynaBERT w to both size and efficiency of the student model, AdaBERT incor-
the width-adaptive and depth-adaptive DynaBERT using porates not only soft and hard targets for distillation but
the same knowledge source as in the width-adaptive pro- alsoincludesthenormalizedparametersizeandnumberof
cess. Metadistil [185] points out two common issues in floating-point operations of the student model in the loss
general distillation: the teacher cannot perceive the stu- function. Ultimately, this loss function is used to choose
dent’s abilities, and a strong teacher may not necessarily appropriateCNN-basedoperations.However,MixKD[188]
be effective in teaching good students. To address these startswiththedatasetandappliesMixUp[198]toKDinor-
problems, it proposes a novel distillation approach: first dertoaddresstheissueoflimitedtrainingsamplesleading
distill a copy S’ of the student S on training data, then use toinsufficientknowledgeacquisitionbythestudent.Ituses
the updated S’ to update the teacher model on quiz data, zero padding to make all sentences the same length, and
allowingittolearntoteach.Finally,usetheupdatedteacher then interpolates the word embeddings and labels of two
modeltodistillSontrainingdata.AD-KD[186]focuseson trainingsamplestoobtainanaugmentedsample.Thenitin-
the importance of each token to the prediction results. It corporatesthelossofmixupsamplesintothelossfunction.
aimsforthestudentmodeltounderstandwhichtokensthe Meta-KD[189]recognizesthatwhenastudentislearningin
teachermodelprioritizeswhengeneratingpredictions,thus onedomain,theymaybenefitfromauxiliaryknowledgein
learningtherationalebehindtheteachermodel’sreasoning. other domains. For example, a physics student may find
it easier to grasp physics equations under the guidance
Some methods [183], [184] mentioned above can be of a teacher proficient in both physics and mathematics.
applied to pretraining distillation from the perspective of Hence,trainingan”all-purposeteacher”modelfordomain-

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 23
specificstudentmodelsbecomesessential.Moreprecisely,it to both the teacher and student models to alter the hidden
constructs a learnable sub-network using the output of the dimensions. However, the practical implementation of this
last hidden layer for each instance. This sub-network is ca- approach may disrupt the balance of parameters between
pableofdistinguishingthedomainofeachinstance,making Multi-Head Attention (MHA) and Feed-Forward Network
the knowledge transferable and not restricted by domain (FFN).Therefore,theauthorsaddressthisissuebyadopting
limitations. During the distillation process, the teacher is astackedFFNapproach.Thenitdistillsknowledgethrough
tasked not only with conveying knowledge encompassed the attention and hidden states of transformer layers. Ho-
byinputembeddings,hiddenstates,attentionmatrices,and moBERT utilizes the concept of pruning as DynaBERT. But
output logits but also with transmitting this transferable it initializes the student with the teacher model so that it
knowledge. ReAugKD [190] take the inference phase into can maintain small discrepancy compared to the teacher
consider. It uses an external memory derived from rel- model. Then it derives the distillation loss function using
evant task-specific knowledge of the teacher to enhance input embeddings, hidden states, attention matrices, and
the effective capacity of the student. In the distillation output logits as the pruning objective. In each iteration, it
phase, it adds a linear projection head, which has been removestheleastimportantneuronsfromthestudentbased
fine-tuned for downstream tasks, on top of the teacher on importance scores and guides the student’s training
model’s encoder to generate the teacher embedding and usingthedistillationloss.Thisprocessisiterativelyrepeated
obtains the student embedding from the last transformer. throughout the entire training until the student reaches the
Then it trains with a relational KD loss that minimizes targetsize.TinyBERT[195]combinespretrainingdistillation
thedivergencebetweenteacher-teacherandteacher-student andfinetuningdistillationsothatTinyBERTcancapturethe
embedding distributions. They found that this distillation general-domain as well as the task-specific knowledge in
method can effectively enhance the student model’s ability BERT.Italsodistillsvariousknowledgefromtheembedding
to retrieve external information. In the inference phase, it layer, hidden states and attention matrices of transformer
constructs a knowledge base with the teacher’s soft labels layers, and the prediction layer. But the ablation studies
and predictions. Then, it processes the top-k data entries show that finetuning distillation has a more significant
fromtheknowledgebasethataremostsimilartothestudent impact than pretraining distillation. TED [196] equips each
embedding. The final prediction is obtained by weighting layerwithatask-awarefilter(aneuralnetworkwithatask-
and combining the student’s predictions with these pro- specific head) to extract knowledge from the hidden repre-
cessedentriesfromtheknowledgebase. sentation of this layer. It has achieved promising results in
Besides, Enhanced KD [199] proposes a new distillation bothpretrainingandfinetuningscenarios.
loss function by expanding the loss in a Taylor series,
5.2.3 Discussion
whichallowsforeffectivedistillationevenwhentheteacher
modelisnotfine-tunedforaspecifictask.Thisapproachre- Finetuning distillation is computational costly because
ducesasignificantamountoftrainingcostandarchitecture- switching to a new task always requires the training of a
agnostic. task-specific teacher. So many finetuning knowledge distil-
lation methods [189], [190], [199] are proposed to reduce
5.2.2 PretrainingDistillation the computational cost of the finetuning process. But in
Theprimaryobjectiveofpretrainingdistillationistoobtain pretraing distillation, student is distilled from a teacher
a pretrained model with fewer parameters and good gen- pretrainedonopen-domaindataandcanbeefficientlyfine-
eralization capabilities. So some of them [191], [193], [194] tuned on various downstream tasks, which reduces the
utilize the loss function employed during the training of computational cost associated with distillation for multiple
BERT. DistilBERT [191] is the first to introduce pretraining specifictaskstoacertainextent.However,pretrainingdistil-
distillationforBERT.IttransferstheideaofPKD-skip[183] lation also comes with many new challenges. For example,
(the student learns from every k layers of the teacher) to teachermodelshavelargercapacityandstrongerrepresen-
pretraining distillation and employs the cosine similarity tationcapabilitiesthanstudentmodels,itischallengingfor
loss function to facilitate the transfer of knowledge within studentstoproducepredictionsthatmatchtheteacher’son
hiddenstates.MiniLM[192]placestheemphasisofdistilla- alargeamountofopen-domaintrainingdata.Therefore,for
tiononthelasttransformerlayer.Itutilizestheself-attention generalmethods,thechoicebetweenpretrainingdistillation
distributions and self-attention value-relation (dot-product and finetuning distillation depends on the trade-off we
of the value matrix with itself) from this layer to acquire makebetweenmodelsizeandperformance.
knowledgeandperformdistillation.Thisapproachcleverly
5.3 KDforLargeLanguageModels
allows the student to have more flexible layer numbers
and hidden dimensions. Hence, it can straightforwardly Recently, an increasing number of large language mod-
distilltheteacherintoateacherassistant[200]withsmaller els(LLMs) have been developed. However, many of these
hidden dimensions and then distill the teacher assistant large models are closed-source, which imposes significant
into a student model with fewer layers, thereby enhancing limitationsonknowledgedistillationforsuchmodels.While
the performance of the student model. MobileBERT [193] the student model cannot acquire knowledge from internal
and HomoBERT [194] put emphasis on model width as information,wecanstillusetheteachermodel’sresponses,
DynaBERT [184], but they just alter models’ width while theremainingsourceofknowledge,totransferinformation
preserving their depth because Turc et al. [197] proves that to the student model. Depending on whether the source of
the impact of depth on model performance is more signif- knowledgeforthestudentmodelissolelytheanswerspro-
icant.MobileBERTaddsbottleneckandinverted-bottleneck vided by the teacher model, distillation for large language

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 24
models can be categorized into black-box distillation and student model’s performance falls short, thus generating
white-boxdistillation. new”hard”instructionssothatteachermodelscanachieve
feedbackinthelearningprocess.PERsD[208]evaluatesthe
5.3.1 Black-boxDistillation student’s attempt with unit test cases and gets execution
Even though conventional distillation methods may no feedback. Then it prompts the teacher model to refine the
longer apply, some unique properties of LLMs allow us student’s attempt so that the student can be trained on
to find a breakthrough. Researchers have found that when personalizeddata.
the models’ parameter is large enough, they exhibits sur- Some work focuses on task-specific instruction-
prising emergent abilities, enabling it to tackle intricate following distillation. For instance, UniversalNER [209]
tasks. Many black-box distillation methods leverage that conducts in-depth research on Named Entity Recognition
abilities, and there are typically three methods commonly (NER) tasks. So, unlike the methods mentioned above that
in use: Instruction-Following, Chain-of-Thought (CoT) and increase the diversity of instructions, its emphasis is on
In-ContextLearning. enhancing the diversity of inputs to improve the model’s
1)Instruction-Following generalization across multiple domains. To be specific, it
Instruction-following capability means that the LLMs directly samples inputs from a large corpus across diverse
can generate corresponding outputs based on a specific domains, and then uses a LLM to generate outputs. After
instruction(directingthemodelonwhattasktoaccomplish) obtaining the data, it trains the student model using a
and the input (data required to fulfill that instruction). conversation-style tuning format, enabling it to identify
Due to the fact that black-box distillation can only transfer entitiesofeachentitytypecontainedintheinputtext.
knowledge through datasets, it necessitates a sufficiently Furthermore, this approach of using large language
comprehensive dataset. Therefore, the common effort in models to construct reinforced datasets for finetuning stu-
thismethod[201],[202],[203],[204]involvesconstructinga dent models is not unique to instruction-following but
largedataset(comprisinginstructions,inputs,andoutputs) ratheracommonmethodofblack-boxdistillation.
to enable the student models to learn as much as possible 2)Chain-of-Thought
fromtheteachermodels.Specifically,SELF-INSTRUCT[201] Chain-of-Thought capability refers to the ability of a
employsaself-distillationapproach,wherethemodelserves largelanguagemodeltoprovidebetteranswerstoquestions
both as the teacher and the student. It starts by obtaining basedontherationalewithinthegivenprompts.Thetypical
a manually curated small-scale task pool, where each task paradigmofCoT[210],[211],[212],[213]distillationutilizes
consistsofaninstructionandacorrespondinginput-output large models to generate reinforced datasets containing ra-
pair.Subsequently,itselectsasubsetofinstructionsfromthe tionales,whicharethenusedtofine-tunethestudentmodel.
task pool as in-context examples for the model to generate Hence,theissuesofinterestrevolvearoundhowtogenerate
newinstructionsandmatchinginputsandoutputsforthem. high-quality rationales for training [210], [214], [215], [216],
Finally, it filters out data with excessive redundancy or [217], [218], [219], [220], [221], [222], [223] and how to en-
contentthatcannotbehandledbylanguagemodels,placing surethatstudentseffectivelyleveragetheserationales[210],
the qualified data back into the task pool. This iterative [212],[215],[216],[217],[223],[224].
process continues to generate an extensive dataset for fine- Li et al. [210] systematically explores three explanation
tuning the student model. This has become a paradigm for generation approaches from LLMs and three multi-task
instruction-following distillation, and the 13B open-source learning with explanations methods. Finally it finds that
models Alpaca [205], Vicuna [206] and GPT4All [207] were CROP (Chain of Thought with Rationalization Prompting
trained with some adjustments based on this paradigm. backup) and MT-CoT (Multi-task Learning with Chain of
Also, following this idea, LLaMA-GPT4 [202] and LaMini- Thought)areoutstandingmethods.Indetail,CROPrefersto
LM [203] construct their respective instruction sets and aprocesswhere,foradatasetcontainingquestionsandan-
fine-tune smaller models. Compared to SELF-INSTRUCT, swers,theteachermodelfirstproducesanexplanationand
theirbreakthroughsareasfollows:LLaMA-GPT4generates an answer based on the question. If the answer is correct,
a 52K instruction-following dataset in both English and the explanation is retained. If the answer is incorrect, the
Chinese using GPT-4, and fine-tunes two student models, teachermodelgeneratesanexplanationbasedontheques-
LLaMA-GPT4andLLaMA-GPT4-CN.Additionally,ittrains tionandthecorrectanswer.Ultimately,adatasetisobtained
a reward model specifically for evaluating the quality of with questions, explanations, and answers for finetuning
model responses. LaMni-LM enriches the types of models the student model. MT-CoT refers to a training process for
used for generating instructions and the topics of instruc- the student model with two tasks. The model is not only
tions,constructingamassivedatasetof2.58Mforfinetuning requiredtolearnpredictinganswersbutalsotoprovideex-
smaller-parameter student models, which achieves good planations.Moreover,inthetaskofprovidingexplanations,
results. However, in the methods mentioned above, the the model needs to arrive at the correct answer through
studentmodelisnotinvolvedintheselectionofthedataset, thereasoningstepsittakes.Further,DistillingStep-by-Step
so the teacher model cannot receive timely feedback from [212] demonstrates that good results can be achieved even
thestudentmodelduringthedatasetgenerationprocess.In when the original dataset only consists of questions with-
responsetothisissue,Lion[204]adoptsadversarialknowl- outanswers.Fine-tune-CoT[214]appliesexistingzero-shot
edge distillation, where the student model not only learns CoT prompting to generate rationales from large teacher
from the teacher model’s responses but is also evaluated models,andusesthemtofine-tunesmallerstudentmodels.
byarefereetoassessitsdifferencecomparedtotheteacher It also proposes diverse reasoning to augment the training
model.Thishelpstoidentify”hard”instructionswherethe data for student models so that student models can have

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 25
better performance. Besides, SCoTD [220] and MCC-KDc 4)Others
[221]alsoconductsin-depthexplorationsonthediversityof In addition to the three paradigms mentioned above,
rationales. Fu et al. [225] found that it is indeed possible to thereareothermethodsthatgeneratespecificreinforcement
transferthestudentmodel’scapabilitiesfromgeneraltasks datasets to enable the student model to acquire specific
to tasks specific by employing CoT distillation. SOCRATIC capabilities. For instance, Symbolic Knowledge Distillation
CoT[215]decomposesaquestionintoseveralsub-questions [228]utilizesaLLMtogatherdataandfilterit,therebyob-
to guide the generation of rationales. It starts by selecting taining high-quality Commonsense Knowledge Graphs for
a subset of data from the dataset, manually decomposing trainingaCommonsenseModel.DISCO[229]usesaLLMto
questions, and providing answers for each sub-question. obtaincounterfactualdataandemploysalargeteacherNLI
TheseserveasexamplesgiventotheLLMtogeneratesub- model for filtering, thus obtaining a high-quality dataset
questionsandanswersfortheremainingdata.Theresulting to improve students’ abilities in natural language inference
datasetisreinforcedbyfilteringbasedonthecorrectnessof (NLI) tasks. PubMedBERT [230] conducts a case study on
thefinalresults.Twostudentmodelsarethentrainedusing adverse drug event (ADE) extraction and proposes a novel
this dataset, one for questioning and one for answering frameworkthatsimultaneouslyhandlesadverseevent(AE)
questions. SCOTT [216] takes into account two issues in entityextractionandADErelationextractiontoreducecom-
CoT. Firstly, the rationale generated by the teacher model putational requirements. Promptmix [231] utilizes LLMs
may not match the answer or be meaningful. Secondly, the to mix and relabel text data for classification problems in
studentmodelmaystruggletoconnectrationaleandanswer proportion,aimingtoobtainastrongerdatasetfortraining.
during learning. To address these challenges, SCOTT em- However, Gudibande [232] demonstrates that continu-
ploys contrastive decoding during the rationale generation allyincreasingimitationtrainingdatacanleadtothemodel
processtomakethemodelpaymoreattentiontotheanswer. simply imitating without understanding, thus enhancing
This requires the teacher model’s decoding process to be the capabilities of the base model is also an indispensable
adjustable. In the training process of the student model, aspectofblack-boxdistillation.
SCOTT introduces counterfactual rationales to guide the
studentinobtainingdifferentanswers,therebyestablishing 5.3.2 White-boxDistillation
a closer relationship between rationale and answer. KARD Compared to black-box distillation, the work on white-
[217] addresses the issue of limited memory capabilities box distillation is relatively limited, but there is still some
in small models by retrieving information from external exploration. For example, MINILLM [233] and GKD [234]
knowledge bases. Program Distillation [218] and PaD [219] both focus on the loss function and they find that forward
both leverage programs as rationales and have achieved KLdivergenceoverestimatesthevoidregionsoftheteacher
promising results on math word problems. DOCTOR [222] distributioninlanguagegenerationtaskswhenthestudent
utilizes a teacher model to generate question-answer-style model distribution is insufficiently expressive to cover all
rationales containing commonsense knowledge, and then themodesofteacherdistribution.ButreverseKLdivergence
filtersandselectshigh-qualitymulti-hopreasoningfortrain- focuses on the major modes, allowing the student to learn
ing students. Wang et al. [223] build an interactive multi- the main part of the teacher’s distribution. Furthermore, it
round learning paradigm, where the student first provides doesn’tforcethestudenttoexactlymatchtheteacher’sdis-
its learning status to the teacher LLM who then can pro- tribution but aims to leverage the information provided by
vide customized rationales as the feedback to the student. the teacher to assist in the student’s training. So MINILLM
They also exploit the reasoning potential of smaller LM by samples from the student distribution and uses the Policy
elicitingittotakeself-reflectiononthemistakes. Gradient Theorem to calculate the reverse KL divergence.
3)In-ContextLearning Also due to the high variance and reward hacking policy
In-context learning (ICL) is also a manifestation of the gradient suffers from, it comes up with the single-step
emergent capabilities of large models, referring to the ca- regularization,teacher-mixedsamplingandlengthnormal-
pacity of large models to generate correct outputs for new izationtosolvetheseproblems.SimilartoMINILLM,GKD
inputs based on some input-label examples without up- utilizes reverse KLD and Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD)
dating model parameters. Based on it, In-context Learning toenhancethestudent’sexpressivecapacity.Butituseson-
Distillation [226] utilizes two few-shot learning paradigms, policy KD to alleviate the distribution mismatch between
namely Meta In-context Tuning (Meta-ICT) and Multitask training and evaluation, which involves sampling from
In-contextTuning(Multitask-ICT),totransferthein-context the student distribution without backpropagating through
learning capabilities of teacher models to student models student’s sampling process—something that MINILLM re-
by distillation. In Meta-ICT, it enables the student model quires. It’s proved that this gradient handling approach is
to adapt to unseen tasks through in-context learning and relatively simple yet effective. Padmanabhan et al. [235]
assistance from the teacher. But in Multitask-ICT, it treats generate a transfer set by prompting a language model to
all target tasks as training tasks and directly employs ex- generate continuations from the entity definition and then
amples from target tasks in in-context learning distillation. update the model parameters so that the distribution of
Theresultsdemonstratethatmulti-taskin-contexttuningis the student matches the distribution of the teacher on the
moreeffective,althoughitcomeswithhighercomputational transfer set. TSLD [236] utilizes logit distillation to reform
costs.LLM-R[227]initiallytrainsarewardmodelbasedon intermediate representations and applies token-wise logit
LLM feedback to evaluate the quality of candidate exam- scaling,reducingtheerrorsintroducedwhenQATisapplied
ples,followedbyknowledgedistillationtotrainaretriever togenerativelanguagemodels.MiniMA[237]findsthatthe
thatcanidentifyhigh-qualityin-contextexamplesforLLMs. optimal distillation effect occurs when the student model

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 26
is approximately 40% of the size of the teacher model’s
parameters. It utilizes LLaMA2-7B for structured pruning
andlogit-basedknowledgedistillationtotraina3BMiniMA
model.
Due to the limitations imposed by the closed-source
nature of large language models, white-box distillation
has faced constraints. However, with the emergence of
increasingly diverse open-source large language models
(e.g.Alpaca,Vicuna),white-boxdistillationholdssignificant
promiseforthefuture.
(a) Full attention (b) Sparse attention (strided)
6 COMPACT ARCHITECTURE DESIGN
Compact architecture design is a philosophy that pursues
efficiencyandstreamlining,anditaimstoachieveasignifi-
cantincreaseinmodelefficiencybyoptimizingthenetwork
structure and algorithms while reducing the consumption
ofcomputationalresourcesandmemoryusage.Specifically,
it can be divided into two levels of research: micro and
macro. This section will focus on optimizing the attention
computationandtheTransformerarchitecturedesign.Since (c) Window attention (d) Global attention
the Transformer layer is currently the main component of
theLLM,anditmakesnodifferenceforlargeandmedium- Fig.6:Comparingthesparseattentionpatterns.(a)fullself-
size models, so we will not specifically categorize methods attention, (b) strided attention, (c) window attention, (d)
bymodelsizehere. globalattention.
6.1 EfficientAttention
unless we can design appropriate sparse attention kernels
The standard self-attention mechanism of the Transformer for various scenarios. By observing the distribution of at-
has a time and space complexity of O(N2) for sequence tention across different heads in a standard Transformer,
lengthN,whichsignificantlylimitsitsfurtherexpansionin
[240] found that not all heads attend to the entire context
variousfieldsandpreventsitfromhandlinglong-sequence (someheadsonlyfocusonthenearesttokens)andproposed
problems.Tosolvethisproblem,manyworkshaveemerged learning dynamic attention spans for each head to reduce
to improve attention, many of which have focused on im- computational and storage costs. However, both previous
proving computational and memory efficiency. We refer to works can only attend to past consecutive spans of tokens.
these works as Efficient Attention. Based on the starting Tosolvethisproblem,[241]introducesα-entmaxtoreplace
point and method characteristics, we divide these works softmax,allowinglow-ratedwordstoreceivepreciselyzero
into three categories: Sparse Attention, Linear Approxi- weight,thusenablingmoreflexiblesparseattention.
mate Attention, and Flash Attention. There are also some 2)Window-basedMethods
unique works, such as Transformer-XL [238], which do not Unlike the above approaches, the window-based meth-
improve within the attention operator and, therefore, will ods divide the input into individual localized windows so
notbediscussedhere. that each token only attends to items inside the window
(Fig.6(c)),thusreducingthecomputationalcomplexity.
6.1.1 SparseAttention
An early method [243] achieves a complexity of
O(N2)
n
The Sparse Attention approaches [239], [240], [241], [242], bydividingtheQ,K,andV matricesintonblocks(padding
[243], [244], [245], [246], [247], [248], [249], [250] allow each isusedifnotdivisible)andcalculatingattentionwithineach
tokentoattendonlylocallyorpredominantlyrelevantitems blockbyshiftingoneposition.Thismethodismorestraight-
to implement the sparse attention pattern, thus reducing forwardtoimplementthanSparseTransformer.However,it
computationalandmemorycomplexity.Basedonthechar- is worth noting that n is typically set to 2 or 3 in practice
acteristicsofthesemethods,wecategorizethemintostride- tomaintainperformance,whichresultsinpooractualaccel-
based,window-based,anddata-basedmethods. eration.Tosolvethisproblem,[244]achievesO(N(k+m))
1)Stride-basedMethods complexity by using a dilated sliding window to increase
Thestride-basedmethods[239],[240],[241]reducecom- the receptive field without increasing the computation and
putational complexity by having each token attend to sev- improving the performance by adding ”Global Attention”
eral preceding tokens of length stride to achieve sparse (Fig. 6 (d)) to the pre-selected input positions. Here, k
attentionpatterns. represents the size of the sliding window, and m repre-
[239] is an earlier work. It offered two ways to de- sents the number of pre-selected positions. However, its
compose attention: strided (Fig. 6 (b)) and fixed attention extended implementation requires efficient banded matrix
patterns. These ways allowed each query to attend only to multiplication support, and using the naive CUDA kernels
prese√tpositions,reducingthecomplexityofself-attentionto canonlyhavetherunningspeedasstandardself-attention.
O(N N). However, this method has limited applicability Therefore,inpractice,itonlyhasaconsistentmemoryfoot-

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 27
√
printwiththeoreticalcomplexity,butthereisagapbetween Toensureperformance,itsetsthenumberofclus√tersto N,
actual running speed and theoretical complexity. Similarly, whichreducestheattentioncomplexitytoO(N N).
[246] established a sparse attention pattern consisting of Other works related to sparse attention based on input
threemaincomponents: are SAC [248] and SSA [247]. Among them, SAC regards
the input as a graph and uses an LSTM edge predictor to
• Global attention: A global token set g where tokens
learn the edges between tokens. The nodes in the graph
within the set attend to the entire sequence, and all
represent tokens, and the edges represent attention rela-
tokensinthesequenceattendtosetg.
tions. It also uses reinforcement learning to train this edge
• Local attention: All tokens attend to a set w of sur-
predictor. However, LSTM has limitations, such as a lack
roundingwindowsaroundthemselves.
of parallelism and a limited ability to express long-term
• Random attention: All tokens attend to a random
dependencies. There may be better methods available for
tokensetr.
buildinganedgepredictor.Ontheotherhand,SSAisbased
ItisworthnotingthatthereisalsoagapbetweenBigBird’s onthedifferentiablesortingofinternalrepresentationsand
actual running speed and theoretical complexity, similar to introduces a meta-sorting network that can learn to gen-
[244]. erate potential orderings on sequences. It allows us to use
Inadditiontothemethodsdescribedabove,somemeth- only local windows for quasi-global attention after a given
ods [242], [249] let each token attend directly to close and orderingsequence,improvingthememoryefficiencyofthe
indirectly to distant locations. This method is very similar attentionmodule.
to the window-based methods introduced above but with
a different indirect way to implement ”Global Attention.” 6.1.2 LinearApproximateAttention
Therefore,wepresentthemhere. Thestandardattentioncanberepresentedas:
[242] proposes a new architecture, BP-transformer
(BPT), based on the prior observation that elements closer Attention(Q,K,V)=softmax(QKT)V (28)
together have higher attention scores, while elements fur- Since QKT is quadratic in sequence length and memory
ther away have lower attention scores. It treats attention
complexity, this severely limits applying attention to long
calculation as a graph neural network and partitions the
sequence scenarios. Therefore, several methods devoted to
input sequence into different multi-scale spaces through
linearized attention computation have been proposed to
binary partitioning (BP), constructing a binary tree-based
address this dilemma. Based on the characteristics of these
attention pattern. Each leaf node represents a token, and
methods, we categorize them into associativity-based and
each token focuses on different scale nodes based on the
low-rank-basedmethods.
targetdistance,therebyreducingthecomplexityofattention
1)AssociativityBasedMethods
toO(kNlog(N/k))wherekisahyperparametercontrolling
The natural idea is that if we can calculate KTV first
thedensityofattention.Thecoreideaof[249]isverysimilar
utilizing the associativity of matrix multiplication, we can
to BPT in that it enables each token to attend to all other
achieve linear complexity in attention computation. How-
itemsdirectlyorindirectly.Thedifferenceisthatittreatsthe
ever, due to the presence of softmax, we cannot easily
attentionmechanismasaconditionalexpectationproblem.
implement this. For each row i in the attention result, we
3)Data-basedMethods
canequivalentlyrepresentitas:
Unlike the above methods that need to design sparse
p [2a 5t 0te ]r mns akm ea en au ca hlly to, kd ea nta a-b ua tose md atm ice at lh lyod as nd[2 q45 u] i, ck[2 ly47 fi], n[ d24 t8 h] e, Attention(Q,K,V) i = (cid:80) (cid:80)n j= n1si sm im(q (i q,k ,kj)v )j (29)
j=1 i j
mostrelevantitemstocomputeattentionusingappropriate
algorithms. The most significant advantage of these meth- Wheresim(q i,k j)=eqik jT ,itisactuallyaweightedaverage
ods is data-awareness, which effectively avoids the disad- ofv j withweightsgivenbyeqik jT .Anaturalthoughtisthat
vantageofhavingtore-designthesparsepatternsmanually ifwecanfindtwofunctionsϕ 1(x)andϕ 2(x)suchthat:
in the case of different tasks and data, and it isn’t easy to
obtaintheoptimalsolution. sim(q i,k j)=ϕ 1(q i)ϕ 2(k j)T (30)
Reformer [245] achieves efficient sparse attention com-
andsatisfysim(q i,k j)>=0allthetime,andalsosatisfy:
putation by using locally sensitive hashing to find similar
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
vectors quickly, reducing the complexity to O(Nlog(N)). ϕ 1(q i)ϕ 2(k j)T v j =ϕ 1(q i) ϕ 2(k j)Tv j (31)
Atthesametime,Reformeralsousestechniquessuchasre-
versibilitylayersandchunkinginFFNlayerstosignificantly Then,wecanachievelinearattention.Buildingonthisidea,
reducememoryusageduringtraining.However,thistrade- many different approaches to linear attention have been
off may also slow down the training speed. In addition, proposed[251],[252],[253],[254],[255],[256].
to avoid hash errors, Reformer requires multiple rounds of Specifically,[251]achievesthisbyconstructing:
hashing,weakeningitsfinalefficiencybenefits.Similarlyto (cid:26) 1+x x⩾0
Reformer, [250] views self-attention as a routing problem. ϕ 1(x)=ϕ 2(x)=elu(x)+1=
ex x<0
(32)
Specifically,itisbasedonk-meansclustering,whichallows
queriesandkeystoclusteronthesamesetofclustercenter- Performer [252] also achieves linear attention through a
of-mass vectors by letting the model learn to select sparse kernel function method. It proposes a FAVOR+ method
clusters of word examples. So that each query Q i attends that cleverly uses random projection to project the input
only to the keys that belong to the same cluster as it does. features orthogonally. Without relying on any prior and

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 28
without loss of accuracy, it successfully realizes the linear algorithmcanachieveawiderangeoflinearapproximation
attention. Specifically, by taking ϕ of the following form attentions while ensuring the spectral properties of atten-
for functions f 1,...,f l : R → R, function g : Rd → R tion and supporting causal masks. It is worth noting that
and deterministic vectors ω i or ω 1,...,ω m i ∼id D for some the acceleration effect of HyperAttention can be tens of
distributionD ∈P(Rd): times different in two cases of using causal masks and not
using causal masks. At the same time, if HyperAttention
h(x)
ϕ(x)= √ (f (ω⊤x),...,f (ω⊤x),...,f (ω⊤x),...,f (ω⊤x)) completely replaces all layers of attention, the model per-
m 1 1 1 m l 1 l m
formance will be significantly reduced, so this method still
(33)
needstobalancespeedandperformance.
Tobetterdescribef i,handω iinϕ,fortheelementA(i,j)=
2)Low-rankBasedMethods
exp(q ik jT) in the ith row and jth column of the original
Other methods [258], [259] to achieve linear attention
attentionmatrixA,wegiveitageneralizeddefinition:
are through the utilization of low-rank property. Linformer
SM(x,y)d =ef exp(x⊤y) (34) [258] observed that the normalized cumulative singular
values of the attention matrices in the Transformer model
In fact, as early as [257] there was an approximate expres- exhibit low-rank properties across multiple tasks. Based on
fsi 2on =fo cr osS .M S( inx c, ey) thw eit ph reh v( ix o) us= me ex tp h( o| d|x 2 s||2 a) p, pl e= ar2 t, of h1 a= ves sin in, t Dh ois
t
Aob tts ee nrv tia ot nio fn o, rmLi un lf ao tr im oner bup tre ps re or jv ee cs tst Khe ao nr digi Vna wl iS tc hal te wd o-
matrices E,F ∈ Rm×n before computing attention, en-
and cos trigonometric functions and instabilities such as
abling linear approximate attention computation, formally
negative numbers may appear in the computed results,
expressedas:
Performerproposesanother,morestable,approximation:
(cid:20) (cid:18) ∥x∥2(cid:19) Attention(Q,K,V)≈softmax(Q(EK)T)FV
SM(x,y)=E exp ω⊤x−
ω∼N(0,Id) 2 In order to maintain its performance, it’s essential to set
(35)
(cid:18) ∥y∥2(cid:19)(cid:21) the value of m high enough. However, this can result
exp ω⊤y− =ΛE cosh(ω⊤z)
2 ω∼N(0,Id) in Linformer processing short sequences relatively slowly.
Consequently, there might be a significant difference be-
whereΛ=exp(−∥x∥2+∥y∥2 ),x,y∈Rd,z=x+yandcosh tween the theoretical complexity and the practical usage of
2
ishyperboliccosine.Thisisequivalenttomaking: Linformer.
Recently, Transformer-VQ has adopted a unique per-
||x|||2
h(x)=exp(− ),l=2,f (x)=exp(x),f (x)=exp(−x)spective, performing Vector Quantization (VQ) on the key
2 1 2 matrixK inattentioncalculation.Thisisachievedbymak-
(36)
ing each vector in K closest to the vector in C, where C
However, to ensure accuracy, the number of random sam-
is the training parameter and the VQ codebook. VQ can
ples m is usually larger than the feature dimension d,
be mathematically represented as: K(cid:98) = VQ(K,C),K ∈
which means that when dealing with short sequences, the
Performer may not perform as well as the standard Trans- Rn×dk, C ∈ Rc×dk Since each vector in K(cid:98) is from C, we
former. Only when the sequence is relatively long can its
canfirstcalculateQCT,whichislinearduetothefixedsize
advantagebefullyleveraged.Similarly,[256]achieveslinear of C. Transformer-VQ cleverly constructs a △ ∈ {0,1}n×c
approximateattentionthroughadoublesoftmaxapproach: suchthat:
exp(QKT)V =exp(QCT△T)V =exp(QCT)(△TV) (39)
Attention(Q,K,V)≈softmax 1(Q)softmax 2(K)V (37)
The computational complexity of this calculation is
tW hehe fir re s, ts (o Nf )tm ana dx 1 s, es co of nt dm (da )x 2 dir mef ee nr st io onso ,f rt em sa px eco tp ive er la yt .io Hn os win
-
O(ncd k+ncd
v
+ncd v)=O(n),achievinglinearattention.
Moreover, this method can naturally be applied to autore-
ever, directly softmaxing Q,KT separately, i.e., without
gressivetasks,makingitapromisingapproach.
similarity (inner product) computation, gives the impres-
Unlike the previous approximate attention methods,
sion of running counter to the attention mechanism. [253]
FlashAttention [260] focuses its improvements on reducing
buildsonthisbyfirstconsideringQ,K asnd-dimensional
thememoryaccessoverheadwithgreatsuccess.Itachieves
vectors,respectively,andthenclusteringthemintomatrices
consisting of m cluster centers Q˜,K˜ ∈ Rm×d. In addition, acceleration of training and inference while reducing the
memoryfootprintofattention.Moreimportantly,itisnotan
it inserts a matrix M ∈ Rm×m in the middle such that the
approximate attention method, meaning its computational
finalattentioncomputationcanberepresentedas
resultsarepreciselyequaltothestandardattentionresults.
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Attemtion(Q,K,V)≈softmax QK˜⊤ At its core is tiling, which is the chunked transfer of
matricesinvolvedincomputationtosharedmemorytoim-
(38)
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:17)−1 (cid:16) (cid:17)
softmax Q˜K˜⊤ softmax Q˜K⊤ V proveoverallreadandwritespeed.Forexample,asshown
inFig.7,supposewenowneedtocomputetheupperhalf
whichisclosertothestandardattention. oftheresultofmultiplyingamatrixAwithamatrixB,C 0.
Recently, HyperAttention [255] simplified the existing For standard matrix multiplication there is C 0 = (A 0B 0 +
algorithmbasedonKernelDensityEstimation(KDE),iden- ...+A 0B 3)concat(A 1B 0+...+A 1B 3).AndforTilingmatrix
tified the main entries in the attention matrix through multiplication,C 0 =(A 0B 0+A 0B 1)concat(A 1B 2+A 1B 3)
Hamming-ordered locally sensitive hashing, and proposed reduces the memory access to half of the standard matrix
asimplelineartimeattentionapproximationalgorithm.This multiplication.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 29
be computed in the same round of iterations as l′ and m,
and in the end, l′ will be equivalent to l, and in that way
n
we’llbeabletoreducethethreeroundsofiterationstotwo
roundsofiterations.However,thetwo-stepiterationisstill
coupledandcannotbechunkedforseparatecomputations.
Inspiredbythepreviousderivations,FlashAttentionderives
methods to obtain the final O-matrix after one round of
iterations.ArowinmatrixOisaweightedsummationofV
andSoftmaxresults,whichcanthenbeexpressedas:
(cid:88)N (cid:18)exj−mN (cid:19)
o i ← l V[j,:] (42)
j=1 N
Using and the same trick, introduce a sequence of
o′
alone
and let it participate in the computation using the local m i
andl′
:
i
(cid:88)i (cid:18)exj−mi (cid:19)
o′ ← V[j,:] (43)
i l′
j=1 i
It is easy to see that for N, o i is equal to o′ N, and the
problemtranslatesintofiguringouthowtocobbletogether
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Fig. 7: (a):Standard matrix multiplication, (b):Tiling matrix a
(cid:80)i−1 exj−mi−1V[j,:]
out of the formula replacing it
j=1 l′
multiplication. witho′
:
i−1
i−1
(cid:88)i (cid:18)exj−mi (cid:19)
In fact, in the Naive version of matrix multiplication, o′ i = l′ V[j,:]
only one row and one column of the two matrices are j=1 i
 
r ae ca cd esf sro em fficm iee nm cyory ise va ech ryti lm owe ,fo ar nc dom thp eut ta wti oon e. xT ah me pm lee sm ho er ry
e
=(cid:88)i−1 exj−mi−1 V[j,:]emi−1 l i′
−1 +
exi−mi
V[i,:]
readthesamenumberofelementsfromthematricesAand j=1
l i′
−1
emi l i′ l i′
B, respectively, just for comparability. For matrix multipli- l′ emi−1−mi exi−mi
cation, we can use Tiling directly by chunking. Still, there =o′ i−1 i−1 l′ + l′ V[i,:]
aresoftmaxoperationsinattention,andthedenominatorof i i
(44)
softmaxcontainsthesummationtermassociatedwithallthe
Calculating Attention requires only one round of iterations
elements,sotherealdifficultyinapplyingtiltingtoattention
withtheaboveformula,sowecanchunkthecalculationto
liesinthechunkingofsoftmax.
findthefinalresult.FlashAttention-2[261]improvesonthis
For standard attention, we usually use the numerically
byimprovingtheformula44asfollows:
safesoftmax:
o′ =o′ l′ emi−1−mi +exi−miV[i,:] (45)
exi−m i i−1 i−1
Softmax(x i)=
(cid:80)N j=1exj−m
(40)
Compared to the original o′ i, we only need to divide l N′
by one more l′ in the final computation o′ to get the
N N
where m denotes the maximum of all x i. To get the final correct result, thus avoiding the intermediate multistep
result,weneedthreeroundsofiterations: scalingdivisionoperation.Italsoreducesthememorywrite
•• • CI It te e ar r lca a ut te e lato th iv nre o gr u ea g al hl cx hai l Slto x ofifi ttn mod fi at n xh d (e xtm ih )eax si um mum =v (cid:80)al N ju =e 1m exj−m e
f
wo onv hrue ir em ch
a
hee chra rad ect q. i oo uS mn ip
rp
ee o suc fi tfi OQ ec
d
(ia N,l OOly 2i, i d, wi 2ln Mi′ e,F m
n
−l ea i 1es )f dh o wA r tot rct ioe
tw
en m rt cii p to oeun mt i, a
t
pti
b
lt i eo ai xn cs ik; tfi yi
t
,nx oe wt md h hi
e
eK s
m
rewj o, a MrV y yj ,
,
Since each round of iteration depends on the results of denotes the size of the shared memory. In FlashAttention-
the previous iterations, the computation cannot be done 2, we fixed Q i,O i,l i′,m i to enumerate K j,V j, so that the
independently in chunks. One existing method is to define finalresultofO i canbecomputedatonceandthenwritten
asinglesequencel′ :l′ =(cid:80)i exj−mi,thushaving: backtomemory,andthecomplexityofwritingisreducedto
i j=1
O(Nd).Inaddition,italsoparallelizesthedimensionofse-
 
i i−1 quencelength;whenthebatchsizeandthenumberofheads
(cid:88) (cid:88)
l i′ = exj−mi = exj−miemi−1−mi +exi−mi
aresmall,itincreasestheparallelismonthesequencelength
(41)
j=1 j=1 toimprovetheGPUoccupancy,significantlyimprovingthe
=l′ emi−1−mi +exi−mi computationspeed.
i−1
In general, efficient attention optimization methods
It’s a matter of cobbling together a (cid:80)i j− =1 1exj−mi out and mainly include sparse attention, linearized attention, and
replacing it with an incremental computation of
l′
, and FlashAttention. However, there is often a gap between the
i−1
it’s clear that, after we get to this point, our sequences can practical and theoretical effects of many efficient attention

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 30
methods, for example, many sparse attention methods are three methodologies: early exit, cascade inference and mixture
difficult to achieve the theoretical effects in practice due ofexperts(MoE).
to the discontinuous memory accesses, which is mostly Early exit is designed to dynamically terminate the
because we do not take into account the characteristics of inferenceprocessattheearlylayersofdeepneuralnetworks
theexistinghardwarewhenimprovingthemethods. (DNNs),therebyreducingcomputationalcostsandimprov-
ingresponsetime[273].Theintuitionisthatthepredictions
6.2 NeuralArchitectureSearch. for less complex words can often be accurately accom-
plishedinearlierlayersofthenetwork[274].Thesemethods
Althoughtherehavebeensignificantadvancesincompres-
typically integrate a series of internal classifiers within the
sion and acceleration methods for LLMs, many current hy-
network, which provide signals for early exiting during
perparameters that determine the final shape of the model
inference. Various exit criterions have been proposed [275],
still need to be determined by hand design. This hand
[276],[277],[278],[279],[280],[281],[282].Thislineofwork
design approach often requires a great deal of specialized
mainly focuses on and is applied to small or medium-size
knowledge and experience on the part of the designer, and
language models, such as Bert. And the accuracy may not
italsohastheproblemsofrequiringlongtrainingtimeand
be sufficient enough to support the application of general
highcost.Inthisdilemma,onepromisingsolutionisNeural
LLMsinmorecomplexandrealisticscenarios.
Architecture Search (NAS) [262], [263], [264], [265], [266],
Casacade inferenceutilizesaseriesoflanguagemodels
[267], [268], [269], [270]. For simplicity’s sake, next, we will
of varying sizes to process requests with different levels of
presentarepresentativeworkfromoneofthem.
complexities. Tabi [283] proposes an inference system with
The high computational cost of the Transformer model
multi-level inference models and a probability-based dis-
makes it difficult to deploy on some hardware devices and
patchertodeterminethehandlingstrategyforinputqueries
to realize the low-latency of inference on hardware devices
and balance both accuracy and efficiency. FrugalGPT [284]
with limited resources, HAT [262] has emerged. The idea
learnstoadaptivelytriagequriesfromdiversedatasetsand
ofHATistosearchforthebest-performingmodelstructure
tasksanddirectthemtoanappropriatecombinationofLLM
parameterthatsatisfiestherequirement(giventhehardware
APIs. Both EcoAssistant [285] and [286] employ a query
conditions and resources) for a given latency requirement.
cache to reference historical data for faster responses and a
However, searching out the model structure and training
hierarchyofLLMstohandlethosemismatchednewqueries.
and evaluating it from scratch is costly and slow. It avoids
Mixture-of-Thoughts [287] considers the consistency of an-
expensive retraining by constructing a Super Transformer
swers from weaker LLMs as an indicator of the question
such that it approximately contains all Sub Transformer
difficulty to decide whether to leverage stronger LLMs.
modelsinthesearchspacebysharingweights.Meanwhile,
Generally, this line of works has emerged recently and
HAT trains a delay predictor to predict the delay through
demonstratesapromisingdirectionforthedevelopmentof
an offline method, which further speeds up the search. In
moreefficientLLMsystems.
addition,itobservesseveralimportantproperties:
Comparedtothetwotypesofmethodsabove,thestudy
• First,focusingonmultipleencodinglayersisbenefi- ofMoEhasanextensivehistoryspanningmultiplemachine
cialfordecodinglayers. learning fields including NLP. MoE horizontally extends a
• Second,differenthardwarehasdifferentpreferences feed-forward network (FFN) with multiple sub-networks,
for the model, with GPUs preferring shallow and of which only one or few will be activated during a single
wide Transformers and ARM CPUs preferring nar- forwardpass.Itiswidelyincorporatedintothearchitectures
rowanddeepTransformers. of today’s LLMs [288], [289] to provide both efficient and
powerful services. So in the remainder of this section, we
Overall, HAT provides an efficient NAS scheme for trans-
willdelveintotherealmofMoE.Section7.1beginswithan
former models under different hardware conditions and
introduction to the basic concepts of MoE, followed by an
latencyrequirements.Atthesametime,itcanbewellcom-
extensivesurveyofcontemporaryresearchonincorporating
binedwithothercompressionaccelerationmethodsbecause
MoE into LLMs, which includes algorithmic and architec-
it finds suitable model structure parameters for a given
tural design, training strategies and pratical applications.
conditionwithoutchangingthemodel’sarchitecture.
Section 7.2 offers a concise review of some representative
studies on integration of MoE with previously dicussed
7 DYNAMIC NETWORKS
model compression and acceleration techniques, highlight-
Scaling up the size of language models has been proven to ingitspotentialinthedevelopmentofmorecomprehensive
be an effective approach for enhancing their performance andcost-efficientLLMsystems.
onNLPtasks[271],[272].However,thesubstantialcompu-
tation costs and memory demands associated with scaling
7.1 MixtureofExperts
present a major challenge in the advancement of LLMs.
To address these issues while still harnessing the benefits The earliest concept of MoE dates back to three decades
of scaling, dynamic neural networks (DyNNs) engage only a ago [298], [299] but firstly demonstrates its effectiveness
subsetofthenetworkforprocessingeachinput,makingthe in massively improving model capacity without paying
entiremodelmoreflexibleandefficientinmeetingcomputa- a proportional computation overhead using sparse gating
tional demands under resource-constrained environments. [292].InsparseMoEmodels,asubsetofmodelparameters
In the field of NLP and the domain of LLMs, current are partitioned into a set of N expert networks {E i(·)}N i=1,
research on DyNNs primarily encompassess the following each operates independently on the input with unshared

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 31
TABLE 5: A summary of various Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) methods. For models of the largest size, we present the total
numberofparemetersalongwiththenumberofexpertsperMoElayer.Formethodsutilizingsharedexperts[290],[291],
weincludeboth(thenumberofexpertsusedforsharing+thenumberofexpertsusedforrouting).
Methods BaseModel Sparsity LargestModelSize LoadBalance
(Params/Num.experts)
Sparsely-Gated[292] LSTM top-k 137B/131072 Noisytop-kgatingandauxiliarylossterm.
GShard[293] NMT top-2 600B/2048 Localgroupdispatchingandauxiliarylossterm.
Switch[294] T5 top-1 1571B/2048 Auxiliarylossterm.
ExpertChoice[295] Transformer ExpertChoice 143B/64 Expertchoicerouting.
DeepSpeed-MoE[290] GPT-3 Residual-MoE 52B/(1+127) Multi-expertandmulti-dataparallelism.
M6-T[296] M6 ktop-1 10003B/960 -
Brainformer[297] Non-uniform ExpertChoice 158B/64 Expertchoicerouting.
Mixtral8x7B[289] Mistral7B top-2 47B/8 -
DeepSeekMoE[291] DeepSeek SharedExperts 145B/(4+128) Auxiliarylossterms.
elements to characterize one MoE method: (1) Routing
method decides where and how each input will be routed
intheMoElayer,whichisthemostcriticalelementofMoE
algorithms.(2)MoE model architecturediscussescommon
or specific design choices towards building scaled models
thataremoreperformance-effectiveandparameter-efficient.
(3) Special training strategies sometimes are needed to
accommodate the uncertainty raised from learning-based
routingmethods.WesummarizedsomerepresentativeMoE
methodsinTABLE5.
7.1.1 RoutingMethod
ForanMoEsystem,themostcrucialfactoraffectingitsper-
formance and the primary design concern is the ensurance
ofloadbalancingamongtheexperts.
Fig.8:Illustrationofatransformerblockwithanintegrated
In a standard distributed training settings, experts from
MoElayer.
thesamelayerarescatteredacrossmultipledevices.Eachof
themisasimplefeed-forwardnetwork(FFN)inmostcases
and computes in parallel. And the maximum number of
weight. During training and inference, each input example
tokenseachexpertcanprocessduringasingleforwardpass,
x(i.e.,atokenrepresentationinlanguagemodels)wouldbe
also known as the expert capacity, is limited by the memory
routed to specific expert(s) via gating function G(·) whose
ofdeviceitresides.Generally,withoutspecificalgorithmor
input is also x and the output is a sparse n-dimensional
architecturedesign,tokensfromthesamebatchareassigned
vector. The final output y of MoE module is a weighted
unevenly among experts by the gating function due to its
combinationwhichcanbewrittenas:
sparsity. Therefore, if too many tokens are routed to the
(cid:88)N same expert, surpassing its capacity, this will lead to an
y = G(x) iE i(x) (46)
overflow issue. The computation for the overflown part will
i=1 be skipped and those tokens will be passed directly to the
BasedonthesparsityofG(x),wecanskipthecomputation next layer via a residual connection. Thus unbalance loads
of E i(x) wherever G(x) i = 0 . Since only part of model across experts lead to under-processing of tokens and a
parametersareactivatedforeachinputandallexpertshave waste of computation and memory for experts with empty
thepotentialtobeutilizedbydifferentsamples,MoEmodel slots.
theoretically enjoys a competitive learning ability with a Besides performance decline, imbalanced loads across
much faster inference speed comparing to its dense coun- expertscouldalsoleadtoaself-reinforcingphenomenonthat
terpart.AsTransformer[1]hasbecomethestandardchoice inherently limits the capabilities of MoE system through
for language model, the most common way to introduce training. This phenomenon manifests as the gating net-
MoE into Transformer is to replace the feed-forward layer work converging to a state where it always produces large
of certain block(s) with MoE layer, of which each expert weights for the same few experts, which rapidly trained
is itself a regular Transformer feed-forward network. An with large amount of data and are favored by the gating
example of MoE layer is given in Fig. 8. By increasing the network even more. Consequently, the remaining experts
number of experts, the parameter size could grow from remain undertrained and underutilized, which results in
hundredsofmillionstohundredsofbillionsoreventrillions the original MoE network collapses to a smaller network
to match the size of LLMs. There are mainly three key comprisingonlythefewactiveexperts.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 32
Alongside the problem of load imbalance, there are routing algorithm using reinforcement learning, in which
also methods dedicated to mitigate other adverse effects each router is seen as policy with actions and rewards
stemming from the sparse nature of MoE, such as unstable definedbytheselectionofexpertsandthepredictedproba-
routingorthetrade-offbetweensparsityandaccuracy. bilityofthecorrectoutputtokenrespectively.Inadditionto
Basedontheprimaryproblemeachmethodaddress,we employing learnable gating networks, some studies imple-
categorize the existing routing methods into the following ment non-learnable strategies to regulate the load distribu-
twogroupsandbeginourreview. tion across experts. Hash layer [305] employs a parameter-
Towards load balancing. Most routing methods apply free hash function to replace dynamic gating with a pre-
an additional learnable gating network in each MoE layer. defined fixed mapping from tokens to specific experts,
A simple choice yet adopted by most works is to use one whichconsequentlyeliminatesloadimbalance.MoWE[306]
linear layer with trainable matrix W ∈ Rd×N, where d is routes each word to one specific expert based on auxiliary
model dimension and N is the number of experts, then vocabulary mapping and ensures that the words assigned
followed by a non-linear function like softmax or sigmoid. to each expert are of approximately the same frequency
The N columns of W {w 1,··· ,w N} can also be seen as in the pretraining data. Inspired by Hash layer, PanGu-
embeddingsofN expertsrespectivelyandreadersmayfind Σ [307], [308] deploys a two-level routing that first maps
this expression in some works. For each token x ∈ Rd, the each token to a group of candidate experts by domain and
routingscorebetweenxandi-thexpertisgivenbythedot- then uses random hash to choose a particular expert from
productsimilaritymetrics i = x·w i.Toaddsparsitytothe that group for processing. THOR [309] also simplifies the
gatingnetwork,i.e.,touseonlykexperts(k ≪N)eachMoE gatingprocesswithaparameter-freeapproachbyrandomly
layer, only experts with the highest top-k values of {s i}N
i=1
selectingapairofexpertsfromeachlayerduringatraining
(set of indices T) will be selected for token x. In general, if iterationanddispatchingthewholebatchoftokenstothose
expertiisactivated,itsgatingvalueisgivenby experts.
 (cid:80) The methods we have described so far can only be
exp(s i)/
j∈T
exp(s j), softmaxgating,k >1
utilizedtothefullestextentwithsufficientdeviceresources
G(x) i = exp(s i)/(cid:80)N j=1exp(s j), softmaxgating,k =1 (i.e., no overflow issues are encountered). In more realistic
σ(s
i), sigmoidgating senarios, one must take additional strategy to handle over-
(47) flow. The simplest solution is to stop assigning tokens to
where σ(·) is the sigmoid function. Note that for softmax experts with full workloads. However, in this way only
gating,top-1methodsformulatesightlydifferentlytomake either the prefix of the input sentences or the sentences
G(x) i non-trivial. The above idea is first proposed in [292] withsmallindicesinthebatchdimensionwillbeprocessed,
and applied to LSTM models [300]. To mitigate the issue basedonwhetherthebatchisflattenedalongthesequence
of self-reinforcing, they add a tunable Guassian noise to length or the batch dimension, which leads to a biased
the routing scores and employ two additional loss terms selectionandunderutilizationoftrainingorinferencedata.
to encourage more balanced routing scores and selection To address this issue, Z-code [310] and BASE [303] pro-
rates across the experts. GShard [293] integrates MoE into pose to shuffle the input tokens in the flattened batch to
transformers by replacing every other feed-forward layer disentangle the probability of a token being selected from
withanMoElayerusingtop-2gating.Theyproposeseveral its position. In the domain of vision transformer, V-MoE
strategies to ensure load balancing, including (1) partion- [311]introducesBatchPrioritizedRoutingalgorithm(BPR),
ing tokens into groups and limiting the number of tokens which additionally compute a priority score for each token
that each experts can receive from a single group; (2) an (e.g.,themaximumofroutingscoresbetweenthetokenand
auxiliarylosstermwhichhasbeenwidelyadoptedbylater all experts) and sort tokens accordingly before allocation.
works [294], [301], [302] and (3) a random routing strategy. Therefore only insignificant tokens will be discarded. ST-
Tofurtheralignthecomputationalcostwiththatofavanilla MoE [312] finds that BPR benefits language models as
transformer, Switch Transformer [294] routes each token to well, especially in low-resource regimes where the expert
onlyoneexpertwithtop-1gating. capacity is even less than the average number of tokens
The aforementioned studies primarily suggest interme- each expert receives. Note that BPR can only be applied to
diary strategies, such as auxiliary loss terms, to promote encoder side of encoder-decoder model since the inputs of
load balancing during training. Other researches aim at encoderarenotautoregressivethusareallowedtoseeeach
improving the gating function to directly regularize or other, otherwise model could cheat by using future token
even guarantee perfectly balanced loads across experts. information.
BASE Layer [303] formulates token-to-expert allocation as Effective routing with sparsity. Although sparsity
a linear assignment problem, which maximizes the scores boundsthecomputationalcostinalarge-scaleMoEsystem,
between expert and their assigned tokens while subject to it generally limits the network’s capability and impedes
aconstraintthateachexpertmustreceiveanequalamount convergenceduetounstableroutingdynamics.DeepSpeed-
of tokens. Expert choice [295] is another routing strategy MoE [290] observes that increasing the number of experts
guaranteeing perfect load balancing with no additional eachtokengoesthroughhelpsaccuracy.Inordertoleverage
regularization required. Instead of letting tokens select the this property while keeping the computation costs as top-
top-k experts, each expert chooses top-k tokens which also 1 gating, they propose Residual-MoE by fixing one expert
basedonroutingscores.Consequently,eachexpertcanhave andvaryingthesecondexpertforeachtokentoachievethe
exactly same workloads and each token can be processed benefitofusing2expert.DeepSeek-MoE[291]employsthe
byavariablenumberofexperts.Clarketal.[304]proposea same methodology, utilizing a fixed set of shared experts

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 33
tocaptureandconsolidatecommonknowledge,augmented fixed number of experts per-layer in {64,128} is recom-
by a distinct set of routed experts dedicated to knowledge mended by [304] and also have been practiced in a lot of
specialization.M6-T[296]alsonoticestheadvantageoftop- sparse large language models [312], [314], [317]. Moreover,
k gatingoverthetop-1.Theyproposetosplitexpertintok DeepSpeed-MoE[290]questionsthestandardMoEarchitec-
groups and perform k top-1 routing in parallel to match ture putting the same number of experts in all MoE layers.
the efficiency of top-1 gating. To ensure each expert can Theirexperimentssuggestthatalargenumberofexpertsin
receive rich and diverse tokens under the sparse settings, deeperlayersboosttheperformancemoreeffectively.There-
MoEC [302] encourages experts to form clustered structure fore they introduce a pyramid structure by utilizing more
by closing the routing probability among neighbor experts experts only in the last two layers and achieve comparable
with designedloss termand randomlydrops someexperts resultsasstandardMoEmodelsbutwithfewerparameters.
ineachclusterbeforetheglobaltop-1gating. Above works are all built upon uniform transformer
Besidessparsity,DSelect-k[313]noticesthediscontinuity blocks and by interleaving dense and sparse layers, Brain-
in top-k gating methods and suggest this could lead to former [297] explores a non-uniform architecture with
convergence and performance issues when training with sparse layer inspired by the success of EfficientNet [318]
gradient-based methods. They propose a continuously dif- and sandwich transformer [319]. An evolutionary search
ferentiable and sparse gating function, which densely se- algorithm is applied to explore the best Brainformer block
lects experts at beginning of training but fast converges to architectureinthesearchspaceconsistingofdifferentlayer
sparseexpertselectionbyaddinganregularizationterm.X- types (namely self attention, MoE and dense FFN sub-
MoE[301]pointsoutthatcurrentroutingmechanismstend layers), interleaving orders and hyperparameter settings
to push token representations towards expert embeddings such as model dimension and number of attention heads.
which potentially harms the representation capacity. They The whole network is constructed by stacking a variable
proposetocalculatetheroutingscoresbetweentokensand number of blocks according to different scales. Experiment
experts in a low-dimensional space with additional nor- results demonstrate a clear advantage in terms of both
malizationandlearnablegatingtemperature.ST-MoE[312] efficiencyandcapacityoveritsGLaM[314]counterpartand
conducted an extensive study on the training stability and Primer[320]densemodelproducedbyNAS[321].
fine-tuning quality of sparse MoE models. They framed
7.1.3 TrainingStrategies
the training process of sparse models as a quality-stability
trade-offs:variousstabilitytechniques,suchasdropoutand Existinglearning-basedroutingmethodsusuallytrainboth
gradient clipping, could enhance the training stability but the gating and expert networks jointly from scratch. As
often come at the expense of model quality. Therefore they the parameters of MoE layers are randomly initialized, the
propose router z-loss to address both the instability issue routing behavior at the beginning stage of training can be
andtheproblemofqualitydegradation. seen as random routing and the correspondences between
tokens and experts are highly unstable. As a result, MoE
modelstakealongertimetoconvergewithapotentialrisk
7.1.2 MoEmodelarchitecture
of reinforcing improper routing behavior which eventually
In this part we discuss how to arrange MoE layers into a limitsthemodelquality.
Transformer-based model, such as the frequency of expert To handle this problem, a two-stage training strategy is
layersandthenumberofexperts,whichcouldsignificantly introduced in [316], [322] to separate the training of the
affectthescaleofmodelsandtheoverallperformances. gating network and expert networks. In the first stage,
Intransformer,sparsemodelusuallystartswithadense StableMoE [316] learns a balanced and cohesive routing
model and scales up by substituting or inserting MoE lay- strategyfollowingastandardMoEtrainingprocesswithad-
ers at a fixed interval or heuristically. A common design ditionalbalanceloss.Throughoutthesecondstage,therout-
deployed in most large sparse expert models [293], [294], ing strategy is freezed to provide a stable token-to-expert
[295], [314], [315] is to replace the feed-forward component assignmentforthetrainingoftherestofmodel.Experiments
ofeveryotherTransformerblockwithaMoElayer(i.e.,ata confirm that the consistency of routing strategy boost both
frequency of 0.5). Other frequencies are also adopted, such the convergence speed and final performance. Conversely,
as0.25(i.e.,substitutingeveryfourthFFNlayer)in[312]and EvoMoE [322] starts from training then diversifying from
1.0(i.e.,placingineverylayer).Ingeneral,experiments[304] one common expert at stage one before learning the gating
suggest a frequency at 0.5-1.0 and lower frequency under- network and sparsifying the network in the second stage.
minestheperformance.However,therearealsoworks[301], In this way experts are able to get sufficient training in the
[302],[303],[305],[316]introducingafixednumberofexpert early stage and more suitable routing strategy can be built
layerstobaselinemodelsbyspreadingMoElayersunevenly ontheexploitationofspecializedexperts.
acrossthenetwork.Forinstance,BASE[303]insertsalarge Another line of works set out to alleviate the overfitting
MoE layer consisting of stacked FFNs only after middle problem raised from the imbalance between vast number
layer. of parameters and limited training examples via special
As for the number of experts per-layer, although using dropout[323]mechanismatMoElayer.Forinstance,Switch
more experts continuously brings quality gains in most Transformer [294] increases the dropout rate solely inside
cases, diminishing returns in the improvements are also theexperts,namedasexpertdropout,toaidtheperformance
reportedinearlierworks[293],[294].Furtheranalyses[304], on downstream tasks with very few training data. Gating
[312]alsopointsoutthedrastically-diminishingincremental Dropout[324]furtherpushestraditionaldropouttoanother
benefits from routing as the base model size increases. A level to reduce the communication cost for dispatching

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 34
tokens across devices and also improve the performance oftheircapabilities,researchershaveexploredseveralways
during training. Specifically, they permit tokens to ignore tointroducetraditionalmodelcompressiontechniquesinto
theassignmentfromgatingnetworkwithcertainprobability MoEmodels.
and instead route them to the experts on the same device. SwitchTransformer[294]madethefirstattempttodistill
Thisalsoencouragesexpertstofunctionmorerobustlyand largesparsemodelsintosmalldensemodels.Theirfindings
learn a generalization ability. The results demonstrate that indicatethatitispossibletopreserveapproximately30%of
GatingDropoutindeedacceleratetheconvergenceofsparse the quality gains achieved through scaling when distilling
MoE models in terms of wallclock time and enhance the toaFLOP-matcheddensevariantforbothpre-trainingand
modelquality. fine-tuning tasks. DeepSpeed-MoE [290] studies the poten-
tial of distilling a large teacher MoE model into a smaller
7.1.4 MoEApplications student MoE model with shallower expert networks. Ad-
The success of MoE models promotes a series of works ditionally, they suggest a stage-KD training strategy (i.e.,
deploying sparse MoE algorithms in actual LLM applica- halting distillation at specific steps) to mitigate the under-
tions or combining with other model compression and ac- fitting issue stemming from the student model’s limited
celerationtechniquesinpursuitofgreaterefficiency.CPM-2 expertcapacity.
[325]integratesBASELayer[303]intotheirlargestChinese- As another prominent tool for parameter reduction, the
English bilingual models with 198 billion parameters. Fol- pruning of MoE models aims to remove redundant or less
lowingGShard[293],GLaM[314]trainsafamilyofdecoder- influential components, usually a subset of less important
only sparse MoE models, the largest of which has 1.2T pa- expertnetworks,withminimalimpactontheperformance.
rameters and yields better zero, one and few-shot learning The hypothesis behind pruning, as suggested by Z-code
abilities in comparison with its dense GPT-3 [9] counter- [310], is that different experts can specialize in distinct as-
parts. Seeking to close the performance gap between high pectsofthetaskduringtraining,makingasubsetofexperts
and low-resource languages and break the 200 language competent enough for a given task to a certain extent. Z-
barrier,aSparsely-GatedMoEmodelwith54.5Bparameters code tried two methods for expert selection: random selec-
is developed by [317], following the optimaztion process tionandselectionbasedonutilizationratesinthevalidation
in [293], and casts light on a promising approach towards set. Chen etc [327] observe the long-tailed distribution of
a universal translation system. A revealing article on the expertcontributionsindownstreamtasks.DifferentfromZ-
technical details of GPT-4 [288] confirms the deployment code’sapproach,theyproposetoprogressivelypruneaway
of a MoE model consisting of 16 experts inside GPT-4. most experts throughout the fine-tuning process, leaving
Each expert is tuned to specialize in a specific domain or only the most professional one for the target downstream
task, thereby endowing GPT-4 with the multi-task ability. task. The experiment results highlight the effectiveness of
Mixtral [289] builds upon Mistral 7B and replaces all FFN theirpruningstrategy,preserving99.3%ofthebenefitsfrom
sub-blocks by MoE layers, each consisting of 8 experts and MoE while enjoying the same resource consumption as
a top-2 gating network. The resulted Mixtral 8x7B only vanilla dense models during inference. As an alternative
uses 13B active parameters during inference but surpasses approach,MPOE[328]introduceaparameter-efficientMoE
Llama 2 70B [18] and GPT-3.5 on several benchmarks. architecture by decomposing the parameter matrix of each
DeepSeekMoE [291] proposes a series of MoE models with expertintocentralandauxiliarytensors.Thecentraltensoris
sizes of 2B, 16B, and 145B as well as aligned versions, to believed to encode the majority of the information present
demonstrate the adaptability and versatility of their MoE in the original matrix, which is likely to be similar across
architectures. OpenMoE [326] also releases a suite of open- experts and thus suitable for sharing among them. On the
sourcedMoEmodels,buildinguponthearchitecturesofST- other hand, the auxiliary tensors capture the individual
MoE[312]andResidual-MoE[290].Inaddition,theyoffera characteristics and serve as a complement to the central
comprehensive study and a few insights on MoE’s routing tensor. This parameter-sharing method has been shown to
behaviorthroughouttraining. beeffective,achievinga27.2xreductionintotalparameters
whileyieldingbetterperformancecomparingtotheSwitch
Transformer.
7.2 CombineingMoEwithotherefficienttechniques
Witnessing the great success of MoE models, there are
The Mixture-of-Experts approach inspires the field as an alsoeffortstointroducesparsityintoastandardtransformer
alternative pathway for buidling more powerful and effi- model with the purpose of reducing the number of param-
cientLLMs.GiventhatMoEisakintoanartofarchitecture eters involved in computation while retaining the repre-
design and is orthogonal to most model compression and sentation power. MoEBERT [329] adapts the feed-forward
accelerationtechniques,therearealsoworksexploringways networks in a pre-trained BERT [3] into multiple experts
tomergeitsinherentsparsitywithotheroptimizationstrate- and activates only one expert during inference to increase
gies,suchaspruning,distillation,andPEFT.Inthissection, the speed. To preserve the original representation power,
wewillexaminethemostrepresentativestudiesinthisarea they share the most important neurons in the FFNs among
andhighlightthepotentialitholdsforfutureresearch. the experts based on the importance score [330] when ini-
tializing MoEBERT. The training of MoEBERT incorporates
7.2.1 ModelCompression layer-wisedistillation,leadingtoaresultingmodelthatout-
IntherealmofsparseMoEmodels,mostexistingworkscan performsothertask-specificdistillingmethods.MoEfication
beviewedastradingmemoryconsumptionformodelqual- [331] aims to generalize the conversion from FFNs to MoE
ity. To reduce the memory footprint while retaining most layers for various Transformer models. The idea is driven

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 35
by the insight that only a tiny fraction of neurons of FFNs 8.1 GeneralFramework
willrespondtomostinputs.Tosplitthefeed-forwardlayer
In this section, we will introduce some relatively general-
intoexperts,neuronsthatoftenactivatessimultaneouslyare
ized frameworks [345], [346] proposed recently. No matter
grouped into the same expert network. And the routing
what kind of scenarios the models are deployed in, we can
strategy is learned by approximating the calculation of the
consider using them or combining their ideas to accelerate
original model. To further reduce the computational and
the inference and thus obtain higher efficiency. Since most
memory demards of standard transformers, σ-MoE [332]
big models are still deployed and run on GPUs, our gener-
and SwitchHead [333] introduce additional sparsity to the
alizationherereferstogeneralizationunderGPUhardware.
FFN and attention components, drawing on the principles Operator fusion is a common method to accelerate
oftheMoEmethodology. model inference by eliminating unnecessary intermediate
results, lowering memory requirements, and reducing un-
necessary memory IO and kernel startup overhead, thus
7.2.2 EfficientFinetuning
improving the utilization of computational resources such
In search of more efficient and powerful model architec- as GPUs, CPUs, and registers. Meanwhile, operator fusion
tures,researchersarealsoexploringthecombinationofMoE is an essential optimization for many state-of-the-art DNN
methods and other cost-effective techniques such as Mixer compilation frameworks, such as TensorFlow XLA [364],
[334] and PEFT methods. These collaborative approaches TVM [365], MNN [366], PyTorch JIT [367], and so on.
primarily leverage the expressiveness provided by MoE However, these frameworks have stringent requirements
while aggressively reducing the training and computation for operator fusion, e.g., TVM uses relatively fixed sched-
cost. Sparse Mixers [335] replaces most of the self-attention ule templates, resulting in missing many potential fusion
sublayerswithmixingandFFNswithMoEsublayers.SMLP opportunities. DNNFusion [345] has better coverage and
[336]goesonestepfurtherbysubstitutingtheself-attention fusion identification capabilities through algebraic simpli-
modules with linear transformations, which also employs ficationandrationalclassificationofoperators.Inaddition,
a MoE mechanism with routing in the feature dimension itfurtherimprovestheefficiencyofoperatorfusionbyelim-
to ensure tokens from the same sentences are delivered inatingunnecessaryoperatorsthroughheuristicmethods.
to the same expert. AdaMix [337] proposes a mixture of Recently,MicrosoftproposedDeepSpeedInference[346],
adapters [338] or a mixture of low-rank decomposition anefficientintegrated inferencesystemfortheincreasingly
matrices [339] with stochastic routing mechanism [309] as diverse Transformer model, which reduces latency by a
a novel fune-tuning technique to enhance the downstream factor of 7.3 in state-of-the-art latency-oriented scenarios
performance. The result illustrates that AdaMix surpasses and increases throughput by more than 1.5 in throughput-
SOTA parameter-efficient fine-tuning and even full model oriented scenarios. It includes the following two compo-
fine-tuningalgorithmsonbothNLUandNLGtasks.Based nents:
onasimilaridea,MixDA[340]alsoutilizesasetofdomain
• Multi-GPUInferenceSolution:Itminimizeslatency
adapterstoinjectdomain-specificknowledgeinparalleland
while maximizing throughput in dense and sparse
then train a mixture-of-adapters gate to dynamically fuse
TransformermodelswithGPUmemoryaggregation.
the knowledge from different domain adapters. This plug-
• Heterogeneous Inference Solution: Besides GPU
in approach showcases its scalibility and efficiency on sev-
memoryandcomputation,itutilizesCPUandNVMe
eral domain tasks. The same methodology is also adopted
memory to achieve high inference throughput for
by[341],[342],[343],[344]toachieveefficientfinetuningon
large models that do not lend themselves to aggre-
domain-specific or instruction datasets and to mitigate the
gatedGPUmemory.
catastrophicforgettingarisingfromcontinuallearning.
Many strategies have been used to maximize the training
throughput,suchastensorparallelism,pipelineparallelism,
ZeRo, expert parallelism, and so on. However, inference
8 ACCELERATION FRAMEWORK with small batch size suffers from the following problems
duetoinsufficientparallelism:
With the rapid development of Transformer-based models,
• A smaller amount of data is processed at a time,
variousmodelshaveemerged.Becauseofdifferentapplica-
whichresultsintheneedtoreadmodelweightsfrom
tion scenarios, they have additional requirements in terms
the HBM and call the kernel frequently, incurring a
of latency, throughput, memory, etc, making it difficult for
significantoverhead.
ustodeploythemodels.Inthissection,weintroducesome
• Eachkernelcallwritesdatatoglobalmemory,which
recently developed inference acceleration frameworks for
theGPUhastore-readonthenextkernelcall,adding
LLM,whicheffectivelyimprovetheefficiencyofthemodels
additionalcommunicationoverhead.
in different scenarios, as shown in TABLE 6. We classify
• The current cuBLAS and CUTLASS GeMM libraries
thegeneralframeworkandspecializedframeworkbasedon
arenotoptimizedforsmallbatchsizesandhavelow
the generalization. Here are some more acceleration frame-
memorybandwidthutilization.
works [351], [352], [353], [354], [355], [356], [357] specific to
training, and since this paper focuses on inference, we will On the other hand, regular operator fusion can only
notdiscussthemspecifically.Ifyouwanttodeploytrained be done for element-wise operators. In contrast, operators
models to get efficient inference quickly, you can refer to in the Transformer structure introduce data dependencies
theseframeworks[358],[359],[360],[361],[362],[363]. across thread blocks, making it challenging to do operator

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 36
TABLE6:Asummaryofvariousaccelerationframeworks.
Framework/Passage Generalization Method
DNNFusion[345] General Operatorfusion
DeepSpeedInference[346] General Operatorfusion,tensorparallelism,inferencepipeline
TurboTransformer[347] Specialized Operatorfusion,schedulingoptimization
ByteTransformer[348] Specialized Operatorfusion,schedulingoptimization
FlexGen[349] Specialized Offloadingsystem
Power-Infer[350] Specialized Offloadingsystem
dimensionalintermediatetensorandoptimalbatchschedul-
Query + Q-trans
Attn ing scheme are realized. TurboTransformer also proposes a
Q_bias Score Softmax
Norm Key + K-trans Attention parallelapproximationalgorithmforhigh-frequencyopera-
QKV K_bias 2.9x speedup Attn torssuchasSoftmaxandLayerNorm,significantlyimprov-
1.5x speedup Value + V-trans Context ing efficiency. However, TurboTransformer’s active group-
V_bias
All
Attn_bias ing approach still introduces non-eliminable padding over-
Reduce
Attn
Transform heads. Based on this, ByteTransformer [348] proposes a
+ + Output
padding-freealgorithmtofreethewholeTransformerfrom
MLP
Norm 3x speedup Bias_add the redundant computation of zero-padded tokens. In ad-
1.2x speedup
dition, ByteTransformer optimizes multi-head attention for
Interm FFediate Glue + Ou Ft Fput ReA dl ul ce + + Y the zero-filling algorithm so that the attention is no longer
Feed-Forward I_bias O_bias facedwithredundantcomputationofuselesstokens,further
improvingperformance.
Fig.9:Deep-Fusionstrategyforthesmall-batchinference.
Unlikethepreviouswork,FlexGen[349]sacrificesthela-
tencyoftheinferencecomputingservicealmostcompletely
to polarize the design of an LLM computing system that
fusion. This is because if another consumes data generated
focuses only on throughput. Thus, it is only suitable for
byonethreadblockonGPUs,aglobalmemorysynchroniza-
offlinecomputing.EveryaspectoftheLLMacceleratorcan
tionisneededtoinvokeanewkernel.Toavoidtheneedfor
bereconsideredwhenpursuingonlythroughput,including
globalsynchronization,Deep-Fusiontilesthecomputational
storage management, latency-hiding design of memory ac-
spacealongthedimensionsoftheiterationspacesothatno
cessesincross-domainmemoryhierarchies,andparalleliza-
cross-blockdatadependenciesarise.Inaddition,itcustom-
tion strategies. FlexGen proposes a new offloading-based
designed GeMM for small batch sizes and implemented
inferencesystembasedonazig-zagparallelizationstrategy,
it to be fusible with Deep-Fusion for maximum memory
whichachievesmorethan40timeshigherthroughputthan
bandwidth utilization. Deep-Fusion does four operator fu-
DeepSpeed Zero-Inference. We believe the most inspiring
sions in a Transformer layer for small batch sizes to obtain
aspect of this work is that it highlights the importance of
fourcustomizedkernels,asshowninthereddashedboxin
divergent thinking and emphasizes the need to dig deeper
the Fig. 9 below. For large batch sizes, the operator fusion
into the details of the problem and explore alternative
strategy is the same, with the difference that the GeMM in
solutions.
cuBLASisuseddirectlyinsteadofthecustomGeMM.
Recently, the open-source inference framework Power-
Infer [350] recently made LLM Inference 11 times faster.
8.2 SpecializedFramework
WithoutquantizationandwithFP16precision,itallows40B
In this section, we will introduce some specialized frame- modelstorunsmoothlyonanRTX4090PC;ifquantization
works that have been proposed recently. They are cus- is added, a 2080 Ti can also run 70B models smoothly. It is
tomizedforspecificscenariosandneedsandcanbetailored based on highly localized sparse activation based on LLM,
to meet different requirements. If you deploy models indi- i.e., a small fraction of neurons hot neurons are activated
vidually in high demand in certain aspects, consider using all the time on input, while the majority of neurons cold
them. neurons respond according to a specific input. PowerInfer
Compared to other scenarios, efficiently deploying the exploitsthisfeatureandthefactthatCPUsaregoodatcon-
Transformer model to servers needs to meet the service’s ditionalcomputationandGPUsaregoodatsimpleparallel
low latency and high throughput requirements, which computation to develop an innovative GPU-CPU hybrid
presents a significant challenge. In addition, due to the inference engine. This means hot neurons are preloaded
unpredictability of requests and the fact that NLP tasks into the GPU for fast access. In contrast, cold neurons are
employvariable-lengthsentences,thevariabilityofinputdi- computed on the CPU, dramatically reducing the memory
mensionsposesasevereproblemforeffectivememoryman- requirementsoftheGPUandtheamountofdatatransferred
agement and service optimization. TurboTransformer [347] betweentheCPUandtheGPU.Inaddition,PowerInferin-
proposesasequence-length-awarememoryallocationalgo- corporatesanadaptivepredictorandneuron-specificsparse
rithm and a batch scheduling algorithm that aims to max- optimizations to improve the sparsity efficiency of neuron
imize the response throughput by treating it as a dynamic activationandcomputation.Overall,PowerInferenablesPC
programming problem. Efficient memory reuse of variable userstorunadvancedLLMlocallywithoutneedingexpen-

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 37
sivespecializedhardware.Thisfacilitatesthepopularization [6] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. L. Wainwright,
of AI applications and provides unprecedented opportuni- P.Mishkin,C.Zhang,S.Agarwal,K.Slama,A.Ray,J.Schulman,
J.Hilton,F.Kelton,L.Miller,M.Simens,A.Askell,P.Welinder,
tiesforhobbyists,researchers,andsmallbusinesses.
P.F.Christiano,J.Leike,andR.Lowe,“Traininglanguagemodels
Therearealreadymoreacceleratorsbuiltforlargemodel to follow instructions with human feedback,” in Advances in
multi-GPUdistributedinference,butrelativelyfewacceler- Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New
atorsarebuiltforedgedevicedeployment.Asthedemand
Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022, S. Koyejo,
for deploying AI large models on edge devices grows, this
S.Mohamed,A.Agarwal,D.Belgrave,K.Cho,andA.Oh,Eds.,
willbecomeapressingproblem. 2022.
[7] T.Lin,Y.Wang,X.Liu,andX.Qiu,“Asurveyoftransformers,”
CoRR,vol.abs/2106.04554,2021.
[8] S.Islam,H.Elmekki,A.Elsebai,J.Bentahar,N.Drawel,G.Rjoub,
9 CONCLUSIONS
and W. Pedrycz, “A comprehensive survey on applications of
transformersfordeeplearningtasks,”CoRR,vol.abs/2306.07303,
In this paper, we conducted a comprehensive investigation
2023.
of compression and efficient inference for large language [9] T.Brown,B.Mann,N.Ryder,M.Subbiah,J.D.Kaplan,P.Dhari-
models from an algorithmic perspective, including quan- wal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell et al.,
tization, pruning, distillation, compact architecture design, “Language models are few-shot learners,” Advances in neural
informationprocessingsystems,vol.33,pp.1877–1901,2020.
dynamicnetworks.Additionally,weintroducedsomepop-
[10] Y. Wang, H. Chen, Y. Tang, T. Guo, K. Han, Y. Nie, X. Wang,
ular compression and acceleration frameworks tailored for
H.Hu,Z.Bai,Y.Wang,F.Liu,Z.Liu,J.Guo,S.Zeng,Y.Zhang,
large language models. However, as we mentioned in the Q. Xu, Q. Liu, J. Yao, C. Xu, and D. Tao, “Pangu-π: Enhancing
introduction,compressionandaccelerationoflargemodels language model architectures via nonlinearity compensation,”
CoRR,vol.abs/2312.17276,2023.
face more challenges compared to smaller models. While
[11] Z. Zhang, X. Han, H. Zhou, P. Ke, Y. Gu, D. Ye, Y. Qin, Y. Su,
existingalgorithmshavemadesignificanteffortstoaddress
H.Ji,J.Guan,F.Qi,X.Wang,Y.Zheng,G.Zeng,H.Cao,S.Chen,
these challenges, many algorithms still rely on frameworks D.Li,Z.Sun,Z.Liu,M.Huang,W.Han,J.Tang,J.Li,X.Zhu,
designed for compressing small models, and challenges in andM.Sun,“CPM:Alarge-scalegenerativechinesepre-trained
languagemodel,”AIOpen,vol.2,pp.93–99,2021.
compressing large models persist. In the future, further
[12] T. L. Scao, A. Fan, C. Akiki, E. Pavlick, S. Ilic, D. Hesslow,
explorationisneededtodevelopmoreefficientandeffective
R.Castagne´,A.S.Luccioni,F.Yvon,M.Galle´,J.Tow,A.M.Rush,
compression algorithms while ensuring the versatility and S.Biderman,A.Webson,P.S.Ammanamanchi,T.Wang,B.Sagot,
generalizationoflargemodels. N.Muennighoff,A.V.delMoral,O.Ruwase,R.Bawden,S.Bek-
man, A. McMillan-Major, I. Beltagy, H. Nguyen, L. Saulnier,
S.Tan,P.O.Suarez,V.Sanh,H.Laurenc¸on,Y.Jernite,J.Launay,
M.Mitchell,C.Raffel,A.Gokaslan,A.Simhi,A.Soroa,A.F.Aji,
CONTRIBUTORS A.Alfassy,A.Rogers,A.K.Nitzav,C.Xu,C.Mou,C.Emezue,
C. Klamm, C. Leong, D. van Strien, D. I. Adelani, and et al.,
Wenxiao Wang is responsible for this paper’s overall struc- “BLOOM:A176b-parameteropen-accessmultilinguallanguage
model,”CoRR,vol.abs/2211.05100,2022.
ture, content arrangement, the writing of Section 1 and
[13] S. Zhang, S. Roller, N. Goyal, M. Artetxe, M. Chen, S. Chen,
Section 2, and refinement of each section in this paper.
C. Dewan, M. T. Diab, X. Li, X. V. Lin, T. Mihaylov, M. Ott,
Wei Chen, Yongliu Long, Zhengkai Lin and Liye Zhang S.Shleifer,K.Shuster,D.Simig,P.S.Koura,A.Sridhar,T.Wang,
are responsible for the surveys and writing of quantization and L. Zettlemoyer, “OPT: open pre-trained transformer lan-
guagemodels,”CoRR,vol.abs/2205.01068,2022.
(Section 3), pruning (Section 4), dynamic networks (Sec-
[14] A.Zeng,X.Liu,Z.Du,Z.Wang,H.Lai,M.Ding,Z.Yang,Y.Xu,
tion 7), and knowledge distillation (Section 5), respectively.
W.Zheng,X.Xiaetal.,“Glm-130b:Anopenbilingualpre-trained
Yicong Luo is responsible for surveys and writing compact model,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2210.02414,2022.
architecture design and acceleration framework (Section 6 [15] A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, J. Devlin, M. Bosma, G. Mishra,
andSection8).Allco-firstauthorsarelistedinalphabetical A. Roberts, P. Barham, H. W. Chung, C. Sutton, S. Gehrmann,
P.Schuh,K.Shi,S.Tsvyashchenko,J.Maynez,A.Rao,P.Barnes,
order of their surnames. Binbin Lin, Deng Cai, and Xiaofei
Y.Tay,N.Shazeer,V.Prabhakaran,E.Reif,N.Du,B.Hutchinson,
Heparticipateinthecomprehensivediscussionandprovide R. Pope, J. Bradbury, J. Austin, M. Isard, G. Gur-Ari, P. Yin,
manygreatinsights. T. Duke, A. Levskaya, S. Ghemawat, S. Dev, H. Michalewski,
X.Garcia,V.Misra,K.Robinson,L.Fedus,D.Zhou,D.Ippolito,
D.Luan,H.Lim,B.Zoph,A.Spiridonov,R.Sepassi,D.Dohan,
S. Agrawal, M. Omernick, A. M. Dai, T. S. Pillai, M. Pellat,
REFERENCES A.Lewkowycz,E.Moreira,R.Child,O.Polozov,K.Lee,Z.Zhou,
X.Wang,B.Saeta,M.Diaz,O.Firat,M.Catasta,J.Wei,K.Meier-
[1] A.Vaswani,N.Shazeer,N.Parmar,J.Uszkoreit,L.Jones,A.N. Hellstern,D.Eck,J.Dean,S.Petrov,andN.Fiedel,“Palm:Scaling
Gomez,Ł.Kaiser,andI.Polosukhin,“Attentionisallyouneed,” languagemodelingwithpathways,”J.Mach.Learn.Res.,vol.24,
Advancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems,vol.30,2017. pp.240:1–240:113,2023.
[2] C.Raffel,N.Shazeer,A.Roberts,K.Lee,S.Narang,M.Matena, [16] J. Bai, S. Bai, Y. Chu, Z. Cui, K. Dang, X. Deng, Y. Fan, W. Ge,
Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P. J. Liu, “Exploring the limits of transfer Y. Han, F. Huang, B. Hui, L. Ji, M. Li, J. Lin, R. Lin, D. Liu,
learning with a unified text-to-text transformer,” The Journal of G.Liu,C.Lu,K.Lu,J.Ma,R.Men,X.Ren,X.Ren,C.Tan,S.Tan,
MachineLearningResearch,vol.21,no.1,pp.5485–5551,2020. J.Tu,P.Wang,S.Wang,W.Wang,S.Wu,B.Xu,J.Xu,A.Yang,
[3] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre- H.Yang,J.Yang,S.Yang,Y.Yao,B.Yu,H.Yuan,Z.Yuan,J.Zhang,
trainingofdeepbidirectionaltransformersforlanguageunder- X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, C. Zhou, J. Zhou, X. Zhou, and
standing,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1810.04805,2018. T. Zhu, “Qwen technical report,” CoRR, vol. abs/2309.16609,
[4] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, I. Sutskever et al., 2023.
“Improvinglanguageunderstandingbygenerativepre-training,” [17] Z.Zhang,X.Han,Z.Liu,X.Jiang,M.Sun,andQ.Liu,“ERNIE:
2018. enhancedlanguagerepresentationwithinformativeentities,”in
[5] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, I. Sutskever Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Compu-
et al., “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” tational Linguistics, ACL 2019, Florence, Italy, July 28- August 2,
OpenAIblog,vol.1,no.8,p.9,2019. 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers, A. Korhonen, D. R. Traum, and

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 38
L. Ma`rquez, Eds. Association for Computational Linguistics, tionalSymposiumonMicroarchitecture(MICRO). IEEE,2020,pp.
2019,pp.1441–1451. 811–824.
[18] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. R. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, [34] S.Kim,A.Gholami,Z.Yao,M.W.Mahoney,andK.Keutzer,“I-
Y. Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale, bert:Integer-onlybertquantization,”inInternationalconferenceon
D. M. Bikel, L. Blecher, C. C. Ferrer, M. Chen, G. Cucurull, machinelearning. PMLR,2021,pp.5506–5518.
D. Esiobu, J. Fernandes, J. Fu, W. Fu, B. Fuller, C. Gao, [35] S. Dai, R. Venkatesan, M. Ren, B. Zimmer, W. Dally, and
V. Goswami, N. Goyal, A. S. Hartshorn, S. Hosseini, R. Hou, B. Khailany, “Vs-quant: Per-vector scaled quantization for ac-
H. Inan, M. Kardas, V. Kerkez, M. Khabsa, I. M. Kloumann, curate low-precision neural network inference,” Proceedings of
A. V. Korenev, P. S. Koura, M.-A. Lachaux, T. Lavril, J. Lee, MachineLearningandSystems,vol.3,pp.873–884,2021.
D. Liskovich, Y. Lu, Y. Mao, X. Martinet, T. Mihaylov, [36] T.Li,Y.E.Mesbahi,I.Kobyzev,A.Rashid,A.Mahmud,N.An-
P. Mishra, I. Molybog, Y. Nie, A. Poulton, J. Reizenstein, churi, H. Hajimolahoseini, Y. Liu, and M. Rezagholizadeh, “A
R. Rungta, K. Saladi, A. Schelten, R. Silva, E. M. Smith, short study on compressing decoder-based language models,”
R. Subramanian, X. Tan, B. Tang, R. Taylor, A. Williams, arXivpreprintarXiv:2110.08460,2021.
J. X. Kuan, P. Xu, Z. Yan, I. Zarov, Y. Zhang, A. Fan, [37] C. Tao, L. Hou, W. Zhang, L. Shang, X. Jiang, Q. Liu, P. Luo,
M. Kambadur, S. Narang, A. Rodriguez, R. Stojnic, S. Edunov, andN.Wong,“Compressionofgenerativepre-trainedlanguage
andT.Scialom,“Llama2:Openfoundationandfine-tunedchat modelsviaquantization,”inProceedingsofthe60thAnnualMeet-
models,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2307.09288, 2023. [Online]. Available: ingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics(Volume1:Long
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259950998 Papers),2022,pp.4821–4836.
[19] J. Wei, Y. Tay, R. Bommasani, C. Raffel, B. Zoph, S. Borgeaud, [38] Z. Li, Z. Wang, M. Tan, R. Nallapati, P. Bhatia, A. Arnold,
D. Yogatama, M. Bosma, D. Zhou, D. Metzler, E. H. Chi, B.Xiang,andD.Roth,“Dq-bart:Efficientsequence-to-sequence
T. Hashimoto, O. Vinyals, P. Liang, J. Dean, and W. Fedus, modelviajointdistillationandquantization,”inProceedingsofthe
“Emergentabilitiesoflargelanguagemodels,”Trans.Mach.Learn. 60thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics
Res.,vol.2022,2022. (Volume2:ShortPapers),2022,pp.203–211.
[20] G. Yang, D. Lo, R. Mullins, and Y. Zhao, “Dynamic stashing [39] A. Gholami, S. Kim, Z. Dong, Z. Yao, M. W. Mahoney, and
quantization for efficient transformer training,” arXiv preprint K.Keutzer,“Asurveyofquantizationmethodsforefficientneu-
arXiv:2303.05295,2023. ralnetworkinference,”inLow-PowerComputerVision. Chapman
[21] Z.Yao,X.Wu,C.Li,S.Youn,andY.He,“Zeroquant-v2:Exploring andHall/CRC,2022,pp.291–326.
post-trainingquantizationinllmsfromcomprehensivestudyto [40] C. Xu and J. McAuley, “A survey on model compression and
lowrankcompensation,”2023. acceleration for pretrained language models,” in Proceedings of
[22] Y. Bondarenko, M. Nagel, and T. Blankevoort, “Understanding theAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,vol.37,no.9,2023,
andovercomingthechallengesofefficienttransformerquantiza- pp.10566–10575.
tion,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2109.12948,2021. [41] J. Lin, J. Tang, H. Tang, S. Yang, X. Dang, and S. Han, “Awq:
[23] O. Zafrir, G. Boudoukh, P. Izsak, and M. Wasserblat, “Q8bert: Activation-aware weight quantization for llm compression and
Quantized 8bit bert,” in 2019 Fifth Workshop on Energy Effi- acceleration,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2306.00978,2023.
cient Machine Learning and Cognitive Computing-NeurIPS Edition [42] E. Frantar, S. Ashkboos, T. Hoefler, and D. Alistarh, “Optq:
(EMC2-NIPS). IEEE,2019,pp.36–39. Accuratequantizationforgenerativepre-trainedtransformers,”
[24] B. Jacob, S. Kligys, B. Chen, M. Zhu, M. Tang, A. Howard, inTheEleventhInternationalConferenceonLearningRepresentations,
H. Adam, and D. Kalenichenko, “Quantization and training of 2022.
neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference,” [43] T.Dettmers,M.Lewis,Y.Belkada,andL.Zettlemoyer,“Llm.int8
inProceedingsoftheIEEEconferenceoncomputervisionandpattern (): 8-bit matrix multiplication for transformers at scale,” arXiv
recognition,2018,pp.2704–2713. preprintarXiv:2208.07339,2022.
[25] S. Shen, Z. Dong, J. Ye, L. Ma, Z. Yao, A. Gholami, M. W. Ma- [44] Z.Yao,R.YazdaniAminabadi,M.Zhang,X.Wu,C.Li,andY.He,
honey,andK.Keutzer,“Q-bert:Hessianbasedultralowprecision “Zeroquant: Efficient and affordable post-training quantization
quantization of bert,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on forlarge-scaletransformers,”AdvancesinNeuralInformationPro-
ArtificialIntelligence,vol.34,no.05,2020,pp.8815–8821. cessingSystems,vol.35,pp.27168–27183,2022.
[26] T. Piao, I. Cho, and U. Kang, “Sensimix: Sensitivity-aware 8- [45] G. Xiao, J. Lin, M. Seznec, H. Wu, J. Demouth, and S. Han,
bit index & 1-bit value mixed precision quantization for bert “Smoothquant:Accurateandefficientpost-trainingquantization
compression,”PloSone,vol.17,no.4,p.e0265621,2022. forlargelanguagemodels,”inInternationalConferenceonMachine
[27] W.Zhang,L.Hou,Y.Yin,L.Shang,X.Chen,X.Jiang,andQ.Liu, Learning. PMLR,2023,pp.38087–38099.
“Ternarybert:Distillation-awareultra-lowbitbert,”inProceedings [46] Z.Liu,B.Oguz,C.Zhao,E.Chang,P.Stock,Y.Mehdad,Y.Shi,
of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language R.Krishnamoorthi,andV.Chandra,“Llm-qat:Data-freequanti-
Processing(EMNLP),2020,pp.509–521. zationawaretrainingforlargelanguagemodels,”arXivpreprint
[28] H.Qin,Y.Ding,M.Zhang,Y.Qinghua,A.Liu,Q.Dang,Z.Liu, arXiv:2305.17888,2023.
andX.Liu,“Bibert:Accuratefullybinarizedbert,”inInternational [47] Y.Chai,J.Gkountouras,G.G.Ko,D.Brooks,andG.-Y.Wei,“Int2.
ConferenceonLearningRepresentations,2021. 1: Towards fine-tunable quantized large language models with
[29] C. Zhao, T. Hua, Y. Shen, Q. Lou, and H. Jin, “Automatic error correction through low-rank adaptation,” arXiv preprint
mixed-precision quantization search of bert,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08162,2023.
arXiv:2112.14938,2021. [48] T. Dettmers, A. Pagnoni, A. Holtzman, and L. Zettlemoyer,
[30] Z. Zhao, Y. Liu, L. Chen, Q. Liu, R. Ma, and K. Yu, “An “Qlora: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms,” arXiv preprint
investigation on different underlying quantization schemes for arXiv:2305.14314,2023.
pre-trained language models,” in Natural Language Processing [49] S. Kim, C. Hooper, A. Gholami, Z. Dong, X. Li, S. Shen, M. W.
and Chinese Computing: 9th CCF International Conference, NLPCC Mahoney,andK.Keutzer,“Squeezellm:Dense-and-sparsequan-
2020,Zhengzhou,China,October14–18,2020,Proceedings,PartI9. tization,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2306.07629,2023.
Springer,2020,pp.359–371. [50] Y.J.Kim,R.Henry,R.Fahim,andH.H.Awadalla,“Finequant:
[31] B.Wang,Y.Ren,L.Shang,X.Jiang,andQ.Liu,“Exploringex- Unlockingefficiencywithfine-grainedweight-onlyquantization
tremeparametercompressionforpre-trainedlanguagemodels,” forllms,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2308.09723,2023.
inInternationalConferenceonLearningRepresentations,2021. [51] G.Park,B.Park,S.J.Kwon,B.Kim,Y.Lee,andD.Lee,“nuqmm:
[32] H.Bai,W.Zhang,L.Hou,L.Shang,J.Jin,X.Jiang,Q.Liu,M.Lyu, Quantizedmatmulforefficientinferenceoflarge-scalegenerative
andI.King,“Binarybert:Pushingthelimitofbertquantization,” languagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2206.09557,2022.
in Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for [52] M. Rastegari, V. Ordonez, J. Redmon, and A. Farhadi, “Xnor-
ComputationalLinguisticsandthe11thInternationalJointConference net: Imagenet classification using binary convolutional neural
onNaturalLanguageProcessing(Volume1:LongPapers),2021,pp. networks,”inEuropeanconferenceoncomputervision. Springer,
4334–4348. 2016,pp.525–542.
[33] A. H. Zadeh, I. Edo, O. M. Awad, and A. Moshovos, “Gobo: [53] T.Dettmers,M.Lewis,S.Shleifer,andL.Zettlemoyer,“8-bitop-
Quantizingattention-basednlpmodelsforlowlatencyanden- timizersviablock-wisequantization,”inInternationalConference
ergyefficientinference,”in202053rdAnnualIEEE/ACMInterna- onLearningRepresentations,2021.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 39
[54] J.H.Lee,J.Kim,S.J.Kwon,andD.Lee,“Flexround:Learnable [76] W.-Y.Hua,B.Williams,andD.Shamsi,“Lacos-bloom:Low-rank
roundingbasedonelement-wisedivisionforpost-trainingquan- adaptationwithcontrastiveobjectiveon8bitssiamese-bloom,”
tization,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2306.00317,2023. arXivpreprintarXiv:2305.06404,2023.
[55] J.Chee,Y.Cai,V.Kuleshov,andC.DeSa,“Quip:2-bitquanti- [77] A.Kaushal,T.Vaidhya,andI.Rish,“Lord:Lowrankdecomposi-
zationoflargelanguagemodelswithguarantees,”arXivpreprint tionofmonolingualcodellmsforone-shotcompression,”arXiv
arXiv:2307.13304,2023. preprintarXiv:2309.14021,2023.
[56] E. Frantar and D. Alistarh, “Optimal brain compression: A [78] Y. Xu, L. Xie, X. Gu, X. Chen, H. Chang, H. Zhang, Z. Chen,
frameworkforaccuratepost-trainingquantizationandpruning,” X. Zhang, and Q. Tian, “Qa-lora: Quantization-aware low-
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. rank adaptation of large language models,” arXiv preprint
4475–4488,2022. arXiv:2309.14717,2023.
[57] C.Lee,J.Jin,T.Kim,H.Kim,andE.Park,“Owq:Lessonslearned [79] S.J.Kwon,J.Kim,J.Bae,K.M.Yoo,J.-H.Kim,B.Park,B.Kim,
fromactivationoutliersforweightquantizationinlargelanguage J.-W. Ha, N. Sung, and D. Lee, “Alphatuning: Quantization-
models,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2306.02272,2023. aware parameter-efficient adaptation of large-scale pre-trained
[58] W.Cheng,W.Zhang,H.Shen,Y.Cai,X.He,andK.Lv,“Optimize languagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2210.03858,2022.
weightroundingviasignedgradientdescentforthequantization
[80] J. Kim, J. H. Lee, S. Kim, J. Park, K. M. Yoo, S. J. Kwon, and
ofllms,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2309.05516,2023.
D. Lee, “Memory-efficient fine-tuning of compressed large lan-
[59] M. Nagel, R. A. Amjad, M. Van Baalen, C. Louizos, and
guagemodelsviasub-4-bitintegerquantization,”arXivpreprint
T. Blankevoort, “Up or down? adaptive rounding for post-
arXiv:2305.14152,2023.
training quantization,” in International Conference on Machine
[81] M.Park,J.You,M.Nagel,andS.Chang,“Quadapter:Adapterfor
Learning. PMLR,2020,pp.7197–7206.
gpt-2quantization,”inFindingsoftheAssociationforComputational
[60] S.Merity,C.Xiong,J.Bradbury,andR.Socher,“Pointersentinel
Linguistics:EMNLP2022,2022,pp.2510–2517.
mixturemodels,”inInternationalConferenceonLearningRepresen-
[82] Z. Xu, Z. Liu, B. Chen, Y. Tang, J. Wang, K. Zhou, X. Hu, and
tations,2016.
A. Shrivastava, “Compress, then prompt: Improving accuracy-
[61] C.Raffel,N.Shazeer,A.Roberts,K.Lee,S.Narang,M.Matena,
efficiency trade-off of llm inference with transferable prompt,”
Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P. J. Liu, “Exploring the limits of transfer
arXivpreprintarXiv:2305.11186,2023.
learning with a unified text-to-text transformer,” The Journal of
MachineLearningResearch,vol.21,no.1,pp.5485–5551,2020. [83] H.Shen,H.Meng,B.Dong,Z.Wang,O.Zafrir,Y.Ding,Y.Luo,
[62] Y. Li, Y. Yu, C. Liang, P. He, N. Karampatziakis, W. Chen, and
H.Chang,Q.Gao,Z.Wangetal.,“Anefficientsparseinference
T. Zhao, “Loftq: Lora-fine-tuning-aware quantization for large software accelerator for transformer-based language models on
languagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.08659,2023. cpus,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2306.16601,2023.
[63] Z.Yuan,L.Niu,J.Liu,W.Liu,X.Wang,Y.Shang,G.Sun,Q.Wu, [84] T. Pegolotti, E. Frantar, D. Alistarh, and M. Pu¨schel, “Generat-
J.Wu,andB.Wu,“Rptq:Reorder-basedpost-trainingquantiza- ing efficient kernels for quantized inference on large language
tionforlargelanguagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2304.01089, models,”inWorkshoponEfficientSystemsforFoundationModels@
2023. ICML2023,2023.
[64] Y. Zhang, L. Zhao, S. Cao, W. Wang, T. Cao, F. Yang, M. Yang, [85] K.Wang,Z.Liu,Y.Lin,J.Lin,andS.Han,“Haq:Hardware-aware
S.Zhang,andN.Xu,“Integerorfloatingpoint?newoutlooksfor automatedquantizationwithmixedprecision,”inProceedingsof
low-bit quantization on large language models,” arXiv preprint theIEEE/CVFconferenceoncomputervisionandpatternrecognition,
arXiv:2305.12356,2023. 2019,pp.8612–8620.
[65] X.Wu,Z.Yao,andY.He,“Zeroquant-fp:Aleapforwardinllms [86] C.Yu,T.Chen,andZ.Gan,“Boosttransformer-basedlanguage
post-training w4a8 quantization using floating-point formats,” modelswithgpu-friendlysparsityandquantization,”inFindings
arXivpreprintarXiv:2307.09782,2023. oftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics:ACL2023,2023,pp.
[66] X.Wu,Z.Yao,andY.H.Zeroquant-fp,“Aleapforwardinllms 218–235.
post-training w4a8 quantization using floating-point formats,” [87] Z.Lin,G.Qu,Q.Chen,X.Chen,Z.Chen,andK.Huang,“Push-
arXivpreprintarXiv:2307.09782,2023. inglargelanguagemodelstothe6gedge:Vision,challenges,and
[67] X.Wei,Y.Zhang,X.Zhang,R.Gong,S.Zhang,Q.Zhang,F.Yu, opportunities,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2309.16739,2023.
and X. Liu, “Outlier suppression: Pushing the limit of low-bit [88] M. W. U. Rahman, M. M. Abrar, H. G. Copening, S. Hariri,
transformer language models,” Advances in Neural Information S. Shao, P. Satam, and S. Salehi, “Quantized transformer lan-
ProcessingSystems,vol.35,pp.17402–17414,2022. guage model implementations on edge devices,” arXiv preprint
[68] X.Wei,Y.Zhang,Y.Li,X.Zhang,R.Gong,J.Guo,andX.Liu, arXiv:2310.03971,2023.
“Outliersuppression+:Accuratequantizationoflargelanguage [89] E. Kurtic, D. Kuznedelev, E. Frantar, M. Goin, and D. Alistarh,
models by equivalent and optimal shifting and scaling,” arXiv “Sparse finetuning for inference acceleration of large language
preprintarXiv:2304.09145,2023. models,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.06927,2023.
[69] Q.Li,Y.Zhang,L.Li,P.Yao,B.Zhang,X.Chu,Y.Sun,L.Du,and
[90] B.Isik,H.Kumbong,W.Ning,X.Yao,S.Koyejo,andC.Zhang,
Y. Xie, “Fptq: Fine-grained post-training quantization for large
“Gpt-zip: Deep compression of finetuned large language mod-
languagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2308.15987,2023.
els,” in Workshop on Efficient Systems for Foundation Models@
[70] W. Shao, M. Chen, Z. Zhang, P. Xu, L. Zhao, Z. Li, K. Zhang, ICML2023,2023.
P. Gao, Y. Qiao, and P. Luo, “Omniquant: Omnidirectionally
[91] X. Wei, S. Gonugondla, W. Ahmad, S. Wang, B. Ray, H. Qian,
calibratedquantizationforlargelanguagemodels,”arXivpreprint
X.Li,V.Kumar,Z.Wang,Y.Tianetal.,“Greeneryetpowerful:
arXiv:2308.13137,2023.
Taminglargecodegenerationmodelswithquantization,”arXiv
[71] J.Liu,R.Gong,X.Wei,Z.Dong,J.Cai,andB.Zhuang,“Qllm:Ac-
preprintarXiv:2303.05378,2023.
curateandefficientlow-bitwidthquantizationforlargelanguage
[92] T. Hu, C. Meinel, and H. Yang, “Empirical evaluation of post-
models,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.08041,2023.
trainingquantizationmethodsforlanguagetasks,”arXivpreprint
[72] E. Yvinec, A. Dapgony, M. Cord, and K. Bailly, “Rex: Data-
arXiv:2210.16621,2022.
free residual quantization error expansion,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.14645,2022. [93] T.DettmersandL.Zettlemoyer,“Thecasefor4-bitprecision:k-
bitinferencescalinglaws,”inInternationalConferenceonMachine
[73] C. Guo, J. Tang, W. Hu, J. Leng, C. Zhang, F. Yang, Y. Liu,
Learning. PMLR,2023,pp.7750–7774.
M.Guo,andY.Zhu,“Olive:Acceleratinglargelanguagemodels
via hardware-friendly outlier-victim pair quantization,” in Pro- [94] P.Liu,Z.Liu,Z.-F.Gao,D.Gao,W.X.Zhao,Y.Li,B.Ding,andJ.-
ceedings of the 50th Annual International Symposium on Computer R.Wen,“Doemergentabilitiesexistinquantizedlargelanguage
Architecture,2023,pp.1–15. models: An empirical study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08072,
[74] M. Kim, S. Lee, S. Hong, D.-S. Chang, and J. Choi, “Under- 2023.
standingandimprovingknowledgedistillationforquantization- [95] Y. Bondarenko, M. Nagel, and T. Blankevoort, “Quantizable
aware training of large transformer encoders,” arXiv preprint transformers: Removing outliers by helping attention heads do
arXiv:2211.11014,2022. nothing,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2306.12929,2023.
[75] J. O. Neill and S. Dutta, “Self-distilled quantization: Achieving [96] A.Ahmadian,S.Dash,H.Chen,B.Venkitesh,S.Gou,P.Blunsom,
highcompressionratesintransformer-basedlanguagemodels,” A.U¨stu¨n,andS.Hooker,“Intriguingpropertiesofquantization
arXivpreprintarXiv:2307.05972,2023. atscale,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2305.19268,2023.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 40
[97] W.Wen,C.Wu,Y.Wang,Y.Chen,andH.Li,“Learningstructured [122] B.Cui,Y.Li,andZ.Zhang,“Jointstructuredpruninganddense
sparsityindeepneuralnetworks,”Advancesinneuralinformation knowledgedistillationforefficienttransformermodelcompres-
processingsystems,vol.29,2016. sion,”Neurocomputing,vol.458,pp.56–69,2021.
[98] S. Han, J. Pool, J. Tran, and W. Dally, “Learning both weights [123] B.Li,Z.Kong,T.Zhang,J.Li,Z.Li,H.Liu,andC.Ding,“Effi-
andconnectionsforefficientneuralnetwork,”Advancesinneural cienttransformer-basedlargescalelanguagerepresentationsus-
informationprocessingsystems,vol.28,2015. inghardware-friendlyblockstructuredpruning,”arXivpreprint
[99] S.Narang,E.Undersander,andG.Diamos,“Block-sparserecur- arXiv:2009.08065,2020.
rentneuralnetworks,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1711.02782,2017. [124] P. Michel, O. Levy, and G. Neubig, “Are sixteen heads really
[100] M. A. Gordon, K. Duh, and N. Andrews, “Compressing bert: betterthanone?”Advancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems,
Studying the effects of weight pruning on transfer learning,” vol.32,2019.
arXivpreprintarXiv:2002.08307,2020. [125] J.Li,R.Cotterell,andM.Sachan,“Differentiablesubsetpruning
oftransformerheads,”TransactionsoftheAssociationforComputa-
[101] T. Chen, J. Frankle, S. Chang, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, and
tionalLinguistics,vol.9,pp.1442–1459,2021.
M.Carbin,“Thelotterytickethypothesisforpre-trainedbertnet-
works,”Advancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems,vol.33, [126] Z. Yang, Y. Cui, X. Yao, and S. Wang, “Gradient-based intra-
pp.15834–15846,2020. attention pruning on pre-trained language models,” arXiv
preprintarXiv:2212.07634,2022.
[102] S.Prasanna,A.Rogers,andA.Rumshisky,“Whenbertplaysthe
[127] G. Wang, Q. Cao, J. Yang, and Y. Sun, “Task-oriented memory-
lottery, all tickets are winning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00561,
efficientpruning-adapter,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2303.14704,2023.
2020.
[128] C. J. Maddison, A. Mnih, and Y. W. Teh, “The concrete distri-
[103] A. K. Jaiswal, S. Liu, T. Chen, Y. Ding, and Z. Wang, “Instant
bution: A continuous relaxation of discrete random variables,”
soup:Cheappruningensemblesinasinglepasscandrawlottery
arXivpreprintarXiv:1611.00712,2016.
ticketsfromlargemodels,”inInternationalConferenceonMachine
[129] E. Voita, D. Talbot, F. Moiseev, R. Sennrich, and I. Titov, “Ana-
Learning. PMLR,2023,pp.14691–14701.
lyzingmulti-headself-attention:Specializedheadsdotheheavy
[104] O. Zafrir, A. Larey, G. Boudoukh, H. Shen, and M. Wasserblat,
lifting, the rest can be pruned,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09418,
“Pruneonceforall:Sparsepre-trainedlanguagemodels,”arXiv
2019.
preprintarXiv:2111.05754,2021.
[130] F.Lagunas,E.Charlaix,V.Sanh,andA.M.Rush,“Blockpruning
[105] M. Zhu and S. Gupta, “To prune, or not to prune: exploring forfastertransformers,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2109.04838,2021.
the efficacy of pruning for model compression,” arXiv preprint
[131] R. Xu, F. Luo, C. Wang, B. Chang, J. Huang, S. Huang, and
arXiv:1710.01878,2017.
F.Huang,“Fromdensetosparse:Contrastivepruningforbetter
[106] E.KurticandD.Alistarh,“Gmp*:Well-tunedglobalmagnitude pre-trained language model compression,” in Proceedings of the
pruning can outperform most bert-pruning methods,” arXiv AAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,vol.36,no.10,2022,pp.
preprintarXiv:2210.06384,2022. 11547–11555.
[107] L.Yin,S.Liu,A.Jaiswal,S.Kundu,andZ.Wang,“Junkdnahy- [132] Z.Liu,F.Li,G.Li,andJ.Cheng,“Ebert:Efficientbertinference
pothesis:Atask-centricangleofllmpre-trainedweightsthrough withdynamicstructuredpruning,”inFindingsoftheAssociation
sparsity,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.02277,2023. for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, 2021, pp. 4814–
[108] V. Sanh, T. Wolf, and A. Rush, “Movement pruning: Adaptive 4823.
sparsitybyfine-tuning,”AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessing [133] A. Khetan and Z. Karnin, “schubert: Optimizing elements of
Systems,vol.33,pp.20378–20389,2020. bert,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2005.06628,2020.
[109] T. Jiang, D. Wang, F. Zhuang, R. Xie, and F. Xia, “Pruning pre- [134] E. Kurtic, E. Frantar, and D. Alistarh, “Ziplm: Hardware-
trained language models without fine-tuning,” arXiv preprint aware structured pruning of language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.06210,2022. arXiv:2302.04089,2023.
[110] S. Ren and K. Q. Zhu, “Low-rank prune-and-factorize for lan- [135] A.Klein,J.Golebiowski,X.Ma,V.Perrone,andC.Archambeau,
guagemodelcompression,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2306.14152,2023. “Structural pruning of large language models via neural archi-
[111] Q. Zhang, S. Zuo, C. Liang, A. Bukharin, P. He, W. Chen, tecturesearch,”inAutoMLConference2023(Workshop),2023.
and T. Zhao, “Platon: Pruning large transformer models with [136] S. Park, H. Choi, and U. Kang, “Knowledge-preserving prun-
upperconfidenceboundofweightimportance,”inInternational ing for pre-trained language models without retraining,” arXiv
ConferenceonMachineLearning. PMLR,2022,pp.26809–26823. preprintarXiv:2308.03449,2023.
[112] Y. Li, F. Luo, C. Tan, M. Wang, S. Huang, S. Li, and J. Bai, [137] Y. Li, Y. Yu, Q. Zhang, C. Liang, P. He, W. Chen, and T. Zhao,
“Parameter-efficient sparsity for large language models fine- “Losparse: Structured compression of large language models
tuning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2205.11005,2022. based on low-rank and sparse approximation,” arXiv preprint
[113] M. Zhang, C. Shen, Z. Yang, L. Ou, X. Yu, B. Zhuang et al.,
arXiv:2306.11222,2023.
“Pruningmeetslow-rankparameter-efficientfine-tuning,”arXiv [138] M. Santacroce, Z. Wen, Y. Shen, and Y. Li, “What matters in
preprintarXiv:2305.18403,2023. the structured pruning of generative language models?” arXiv
preprintarXiv:2302.03773,2023.
[114] Y. LeCun, J. Denker, and S. Solla, “Optimal brain damage,”
[139] N. Yang, Y. Jang, H. Lee, S. Jeong, and K. Jung, “Task-specific
Advancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems,vol.2,1989.
compression for multi-task language models using attribution-
[115] B.Hassibi,D.G.Stork,andG.J.Wolff,“Optimalbrainsurgeon
based pruning,” in Findings of the Association for Computational
andgeneralnetworkpruning,”inIEEEinternationalconferenceon
Linguistics:EACL2023,2023,pp.582–592.
neuralnetworks. IEEE,1993,pp.293–299.
[140] J. McCarley, R. Chakravarti, and A. Sil, “Structured prun-
[116] E.Kurtic,D.Campos,T.Nguyen,E.Frantar,M.Kurtz,B.Fineran,
ing of a bert-based question answering model,” arXiv preprint
M.Goin,andD.Alistarh,“Theoptimalbertsurgeon:Scalableand
arXiv:1910.06360,2019.
accuratesecond-orderpruningforlargelanguagemodels,”arXiv
[141] Z.Wang,J.Wohlwend,andT.Lei,“Structuredpruningoflarge
preprintarXiv:2203.07259,2022.
languagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1910.04732,2019.
[117] C. Louizos, M. Welling, and D. P. Kingma, “Learning sparse
[142] M. Xia, Z. Zhong, and D. Chen, “Structured pruning learns
neural networks through l 0 regularization,” arXiv preprint
compact and accurate models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00408,
arXiv:1712.01312,2017.
2022.
[118] F.-M.Guo,S.Liu,F.S.Mungall,X.Lin,andY.Wang,“Reweighted [143] C. Tao, L. Hou, H. Bai, J. Wei, X. Jiang, Q. Liu, P. Luo, and
proximalpruningforlarge-scalelanguagerepresentation,”arXiv N.Wong,“Structuredpruningforefficientgenerativepre-trained
preprintarXiv:1909.12486,2019. languagemodels,”inFindingsoftheAssociationforComputational
[119] A.Mishra,J.A.Latorre,J.Pool,D.Stosic,D.Stosic,G.Venkatesh, Linguistics:ACL2023,2023,pp.10880–10895.
C. Yu, and P. Micikevicius, “Accelerating sparse deep neural [144] A. Fan, E. Grave, and A. Joulin, “Reducing transformer
networks,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2104.08378,2021. depth on demand with structured dropout,” arXiv preprint
[120] A. Zhou, Y. Ma, J. Zhu, J. Liu, Z. Zhang, K. Yuan, W. Sun, arXiv:1909.11556,2019.
andH.Li,“Learningn:mfine-grainedstructuredsparseneural [145] M.ZhangandY.He,“Acceleratingtrainingoftransformer-based
networksfromscratch,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2102.04010,2021. languagemodelswithprogressivelayerdropping,”Advancesin
[121] O. Nordstro¨m, “Unstructured pruning of pre-trained language Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 14011–14023,
modelstunedforsentimentclassification.”2022. 2020.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 41
[146] H.Sajjad,F.Dalvi,N.Durrani,andP.Nakov,“Ontheeffectof [171] Anonymous, “Outlier weighed layerwise sparsity (OWL): A
dropping layers of pre-trained transformer models,” Computer missing secret sauce for pruning LLMs to high sparsity,” in
Speech&Language,vol.77,p.101429,2023. Submitted to The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
[147] S.Goyal,A.R.Choudhury,S.Raje,V.Chakaravarthy,Y.Sabhar- Representations, 2023, under review. [Online]. Available: https:
wal,andA.Verma,“Power-bert:Acceleratingbertinferencevia //openreview.net/forum?id=pOBvr1PxFd
progressiveword-vectorelimination,”inInternationalConference [172] ——, “BESA: Pruning large language models with blockwise
onMachineLearning. PMLR,2020,pp.3690–3699. parameter-efficient sparsity allocation,” in The Twelfth
[148] S.Kim,S.Shen,D.Thorsley,A.Gholami,W.Kwon,J.Hassoun, InternationalConferenceonLearningRepresentations,2024.[Online].
and K. Keutzer, “Learned token pruning for transformers,” in Available:https://openreview.net/forum?id=gC6JTEU3jl
Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge [173] A.Syed,P.H.Guo,andV.Sundarapandiyan,“Pruneandtune:
DiscoveryandDataMining,2022,pp.784–794. Improving efficient pruning techniques for massive language
[149] H. Wang, Z. Zhang, and S. Han, “Spatten: Efficient sparse at- models,”2023.
tention architecture with cascade token and head pruning,” in [174] Y.Zhang,L.Zhao,M.Lin,Y.Sun,Y.Yao,X.Han,J.Tanner,S.Liu,
2021IEEEInternationalSymposiumonHigh-PerformanceComputer andR.Ji,“Dynamicsparsenotraining:Training-freefine-tuning
Architecture(HPCA). IEEE,2021,pp.97–110. forsparsellms,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.08915,2023.
[150] Z.Lin,J.Z.Liu,Z.Yang,N.Hua,andD.Roth,“Pruningredun- [175] V. Bozˇa, “Fast and optimal weight update for pruned large
dant mappings in transformer models via spectral-normalized languagemodels,”2024.
identityprior,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2010.01791,2020. [176] H.Xia,Z.Zheng,Y.Li,D.Zhuang,Z.Zhou,X.Qiu,Y.Li,W.Lin,
[151] M.Sun,Z.Liu,A.Bair,andJ.Z.Kolter,“Asimpleandeffective and S. L. Song, “Flash-llm: Enabling cost-effective and highly-
pruning approach for large language models,” arXiv preprint efficientlargegenerativemodelinferencewithunstructuredspar-
arXiv:2306.11695,2023. sity,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2309.10285,2023.
[152] Y.Zhang,H.Bai,H.Lin,J.Zhao,L.Hou,andC.V.Cannistraci, [177] V.Srinivasan,D.Gandhi,U.Thakker,andR.Prabhakar,“Training
“An efficient plug-and-play post-training pruning strategy in large language models efficiently with sparsity and dataflow,”
largelanguagemodels,”2023. arXivpreprintarXiv:2304.05511,2023.
[153] Y.Li,L.Niu,X.Zhang,K.Liu,J.Zhu,andZ.Kang,“E-sparse: [178] G.Hinton,O.Vinyals,andJ.Dean,“Distillingtheknowledgein
Boosting the large language model inference through entropy- aneuralnetwork,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1503.02531,2015.
basedn:Msparsity,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.15929,2023. [179] Y.Zhang,T.Xiang,T.M.Hospedales,andH.Lu,“Deepmutual
[154] E.FrantarandD.Alistarh,“Sparsegpt:Massivelanguagemodels learning,”inProceedingsoftheIEEEconferenceoncomputervision
canbeaccuratelyprunedinone-shot,”2023. andpatternrecognition,2018,pp.4320–4328.
[155] H.Shao,B.Liu,andY.Qian,“One-shotsensitivity-awaremixed [180] A. Romero, N. Ballas, S. E. Kahou, A. Chassang, C. Gatta, and
sparsity pruning for large language models,” arXiv preprint Y. Bengio, “Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.09499,2023. arXiv:1412.6550,2014.
[181] J. Yim, D. Joo, J.-H. Bae, and J. Kim, “A gift from knowledge
[156] R. J. Das, L. Ma, and Z. Shen, “Beyond size: How gradients
distillation: Fast optimization, network minimization and
shapepruningdecisionsinlargelanguagemodels,”arXivpreprint
transfer learning,” 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
arXiv:2311.04902,2023.
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 7130–7138, 2017. [Online].
[157] Anonymous,“Pushinggradienttowardszero:Anovelpruning
Available:https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:206596723
method for large language models,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
[182] R. Tang, Y. Lu, L. Liu, L. Mou, O. Vechtomova, and J. Lin,
https://openreview.net/forum?id=IU4L7wiwxw
“Distillingtask-specificknowledgefrombertintosimpleneural
[158] Y.An,X.Zhao,T.Yu,M.Tang,andJ.Wang,“Fluctuation-based
networks,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1903.12136,2019.
adaptive structured pruning for large language models,” arXiv
[183] S.Sun,Y.Cheng,Z.Gan,andJ.Liu,“Patientknowledgedistilla-
preprintarXiv:2312.11983,2023.
tionforbertmodelcompression,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1908.09355,
[159] S. Ashkboos, M. L. Croci, M. G. d. Nascimento, T. Hoefler,
2019.
and J. Hensman, “Slicegpt: Compress large language models
[184] L.Hou,Z.Huang,L.Shang,X.Jiang,X.Chen,andQ.Liu,“Dyn-
bydeletingrowsandcolumns,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2401.15024,
abert:Dynamicbertwithadaptivewidthanddepth,”Advances
2024.
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 9782–9793,
[160] X. Ma, G. Fang, and X. Wang, “Llm-pruner: On the struc-
2020.
tural pruning of large language models,” arXiv preprint
[185] W.Zhou,C.Xu,andJ.McAuley,“Bertlearnstoteach:Knowledge
arXiv:2305.11627,2023.
distillationwithmetalearning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2106.04570,
[161] T.Chen,T.Ding,B.Yadav,I.Zharkov,andL.Liang,“Lorashear:
2021.
Efficient large language model structured pruning and knowl-
[186] S. Wu, H. Chen, X. Quan, Q. Wang, and R. Wang, “Ad-kd:
edgerecovery,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.18356,2023.
Attribution-driven knowledge distillation for language model
[162] B. Zhao, H. Hajishirzi, and Q. Cao, “Apt: Adaptive pruning
compression,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2305.10010,2023.
andtuningpretrainedlanguagemodelsforefficienttrainingand
[187] D.Chen,Y.Li,M.Qiu,Z.Wang,B.Li,B.Ding,H.Deng,J.Huang,
inference,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2401.12200,2024.
W.Lin,andJ.Zhou,“Adabert:Task-adaptivebertcompression
[163] M.Xia,T.Gao,Z.Zeng,andD.Chen,“Shearedllama:Accelerat- with differentiable neural architecture search,” arXiv preprint
inglanguagemodelpre-trainingviastructuredpruning,”arXiv
arXiv:2001.04246,2020.
preprintarXiv:2310.06694,2023.
[188] K. J. Liang, W. Hao, D. Shen, Y. Zhou, W. Chen, C. Chen, and
[164] S.Guo,J.Xu,L.L.Zhang,andM.Yang,“Compresso:Structured L. Carin, “Mixkd: Towards efficient distillation of large-scale
pruningwithcollaborativepromptinglearnscompactlargelan- languagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2011.00593,2020.
guagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.05015,2023.
[189] H.Pan,C.Wang,M.Qiu,Y.Zhang,Y.Li,andJ.Huang,“Meta-kd:
[165] T. F. van der Ouderaa, M. Nagel, M. van Baalen, Y. M. A meta knowledge distillation framework for language model
Asano, and T. Blankevoort, “The llm surgeon,” arXiv preprint compression across domains,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.01266,
arXiv:2312.17244,2023. 2020.
[166] M. Williams and N. Aletras, “How does calibration data affect [190] J. Zhang, A. Muhamed, A. Anantharaman, G. Wang, C. Chen,
the post-training pruning and quantization of large language K. Zhong, Q. Cui, Y. Xu, B. Zeng, T. M. Chilimbi, and
models?”arXivpreprintarXiv:2311.09755,2023. Y.Chen,“Reaugkd:Retrieval-augmentedknowledgedistillation
[167] M. Zimmer, M. Andoni, C. Spiegel, and S. Pokutta, “Perp: Re- for pre-trained language models,” in Annual Meeting of the
thinking the prune-retrain paradigm in the era of llms,” arXiv AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,2023.[Online].Available:
preprintarXiv:2312.15230,2023. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259370551
[168] S. Gholami and M. Omar, “Can pruning make large language [191] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “Distilbert, a
modelsmoreefficient?”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.04573,2023. distilled version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,”
[169] T. Valicenti, J. Vidal, and R. Patnaik, “Mini-gpts: Efficient large arXivpreprintarXiv:1910.01108,2019.
language models through contextual pruning,” arXiv preprint [192] W. Wang, F. Wei, L. Dong, H. Bao, N. Yang, and M. Zhou,
arXiv:2312.12682,2023. “Minilm: Deep self-attention distillation for task-agnostic com-
[170] Y. Ji, Y. Cao, and J. Liu, “Pruning large language models via pression of pre-trained transformers,” Advances in Neural Infor-
accuracypredictor,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2309.09507,2023. mationProcessingSystems,vol.33,pp.5776–5788,2020.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 42
[193] Z.Sun,H.Yu,X.Song,R.Liu,Y.Yang,andD.Zhou,“Mobilebert: [216] P. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Gao, B. Yin, and X. Ren, “Scott:
acompacttask-agnosticbertforresource-limiteddevices,”arXiv Self-consistent chain-of-thought distillation,” arXiv preprint
preprintarXiv:2004.02984,2020. arXiv:2305.01879,2023.
[194] C.Liang,H.Jiang,Z.Li,X.Tang,B.Yin,andT.Zhao,“Homodis- [217] M. Kang, S. Lee, J. Baek, K. Kawaguchi, and S. J. Hwang,
til:Homotopictask-agnosticdistillationofpre-trainedtransform- “Knowledge-augmented reasoning distillation for small lan-
ers,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2302.09632,2023. guage models in knowledge-intensive tasks,” arXiv preprint
[195] X. Jiao, Y. Yin, L. Shang, X. Jiang, X. Chen, L. Li, F. Wang, and arXiv:2305.18395,2023.
Q. Liu, “Tinybert: Distilling bert for natural language under- [218] Z.JieandW.Lu,“Leveragingtrainingdatainfew-shotprompt-
standing,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1909.10351,2019. ing for numerical reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18170,
[196] C.Liang,S.Zuo,Q.Zhang,P.He,W.Chen,andT.Zhao,“Less 2023.
is more: Task-aware layer-wise distillation for language model [219] X.Zhu,B.Qi,K.Zhang,X.Long,andB.Zhou,“Pad:Program-
compression,” in International Conference on Machine Learning. aided distillation specializes large models in reasoning,” arXiv
PMLR,2023,pp.20852–20867. preprintarXiv:2305.13888,2023.
[197] I. Turc, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Well-read [220] L. H. Li, J. Hessel, Y. Yu, X. Ren, K.-W. Chang, and Y. Choi,
studentslearnbetter:Ontheimportanceofpre-trainingcompact “Symbolicchain-of-thoughtdistillation:Smallmodelscanalso”
models,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1908.08962,2019. think”step-by-step,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2306.14050,2023.
[198] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, [221] H.Chen,S.Wu,X.Quan,R.Wang,M.Yan,andJ.Zhang,“Mcc-
“mixup: Beyond empirical risk minimization,” arXiv preprint kd: Multi-cot consistent knowledge distillation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.09412,2017. arXiv:2310.14747,2023.
[199] S. Dasgupta, T. Cohn, and T. Baldwin, “Cost-effective [222] H.Chae,Y.Song,K.T.-i.Ong,T.Kwon,M.Kim,Y.Yu,D.Lee,
distillation of large language models,” in Annual Meeting of the D. Kang, and J. Yeo, “Dialogue chain-of-thought distillation
AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,2023.[Online].Available: for commonsense-aware conversational agents,” arXiv preprint
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259858962 arXiv:2310.09343,2023.
[200] S. I. Mirzadeh, M. Farajtabar, A. Li, N. Levine, A. Matsukawa,
[223] Z.Wang,S.Huang,Y.Liu,J.Wang,M.Song,Z.Zhang,H.Huang,
and H. Ghasemzadeh, “Improved knowledge distillation via
F.Wei,W.Deng,F.Sunetal.,“Democratizingreasoningability:
teacherassistant,”inProceedingsoftheAAAIconferenceonartificial
Tailored learning from large language model,” arXiv preprint
intelligence,vol.34,no.04,2020,pp.5191–5198.
arXiv:2310.13332,2023.
[201] Y.Wang,Y.Kordi,S.Mishra,A.Liu,N.A.Smith,D.Khashabi,
[224] Y.Ma,H.Jiang,andC.Fan,“Sci-cot:Leveraginglargelanguage
andH.Hajishirzi,“Self-instruct:Aligninglanguagemodelwith
modelsforenhancedknowledgedistillationinsmallmodelsfor
selfgeneratedinstructions,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2212.10560,2022.
scientificqa,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2308.04679,2023.
[202] B.Peng,C.Li,P.He,M.Galley,andJ.Gao,“Instructiontuning
[225] Y.Fu,H.Peng,L.Ou,A.Sabharwal,andT.Khot,“Specializing
withgpt-4,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2304.03277,2023.
smaller language models towards multi-step reasoning,” arXiv
[203] M.Wu,A.Waheed,C.Zhang,M.Abdul-Mageed,andA.F.Aji,
preprintarXiv:2301.12726,2023.
“Lamini-lm:Adiverseherdofdistilledmodelsfromlarge-scale
[226] Y.Huang,Y.Chen,Z.Yu,andK.McKeown,“In-contextlearning
instructions,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2304.14402,2023.
distillation:Transferringfew-shotlearningabilityofpre-trained
[204] Y. Jiang, C. Chan, M. Chen, and W. Wang, “Lion: Adversarial
languagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2212.10670,2022.
distillationofclosed-sourcelargelanguagemodel,”arXivpreprint
[227] L. Wang, N. Yang, and F. Wei, “Learning to retrieve in-
arXiv:2305.12870,2023.
context examples for large language models,” arXiv preprint
[205] R. Taori, I. Gulrajani, T. Zhang, Y. Dubois, X. Li,
arXiv:2307.07164,2023.
C. Guestrin, P. Liang, and T. B. Hashimoto, “Stan-
[228] P. West, C. Bhagavatula, J. Hessel, J. D. Hwang, L. Jiang, R. L.
ford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model,”
Bras,X.Lu,S.Welleck,andY.Choi,“Symbolicknowledgedistil-
https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford alpaca,2023.
lation:fromgenerallanguagemodelstocommonsensemodels,”
[206] W.-L. Chiang, Z. Li, Z. Lin, Y. Sheng, Z. Wu, H. Zhang,
arXivpreprintarXiv:2110.07178,2021.
L. Zheng, S. Zhuang, Y. Zhuang, J. E. Gonzalez, I. Stoica, and
E. P. Xing, “Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 [229] Z.Chen,Q.Gao,A.Bosselut,A.Sabharwal,andK.Richardson,
with 90%* chatgpt quality,” March 2023. [Online]. Available: “Disco: distilling counterfactuals with large language models,”
https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/ in Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
ComputationalLinguistics(Volume1:LongPapers),2023,pp.5514–
[207] Y.Anand,Z.Nussbaum,B.Duderstadt,B.Schmidt,andA.Mul-
5528.
yar,“Gpt4all:Traininganassistant-stylechatbotwithlargescale
datadistillationfromgpt-3.5-turbo,”GitHub,2023. [230] Y.Gu,S.Zhang,N.Usuyama,Y.Woldesenbet,C.Wong,P.Sana-
pathi, M. Wei, N. Valluri, E. Strandberg, T. Naumann et al.,
[208] H.Chen,A.Saha,S.Hoi,andS.Joty,“Personaliseddistillation:
“Distilling large language models for biomedical knowledge
Empoweringopen-sourcedllmswithadaptivelearningforcode
extraction:Acasestudyonadversedrugevents,”arXivpreprint
generation,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.18628,2023.
arXiv:2307.06439,2023.
[209] W.Zhou,S.Zhang,Y.Gu,M.Chen,andH.Poon,“Universalner:
Targeteddistillationfromlargelanguagemodelsforopennamed [231] G. Sahu, O. Vechtomova, D. Bahdanau, and I. H. Laradji,
entityrecognition,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2308.03279,2023. “Promptmix: A class boundary augmentation method for large
language model distillation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14192,
[210] S.Li,J.Chen,Y.Shen,Z.Chen,X.Zhang,Z.Li,H.Wang,J.Qian,
2023.
B.Peng,Y.Maoetal.,“Explanationsfromlargelanguagemodels
make small reasoners better,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.06726, [232] A.Gudibande,E.Wallace,C.Snell,X.Geng,H.Liu,P.Abbeel,
2022. S.Levine,andD.Song,“Thefalsepromiseofimitatingpropri-
etaryllms,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2305.15717,2023.
[211] L. C. Magister, J. Mallinson, J. Adamek, E. Malmi, and A. Sev-
eryn,“Teachingsmalllanguagemodelstoreason,”arXivpreprint [233] Y.Gu,L.Dong,F.Wei,andM.Huang,“Knowledgedistillation
arXiv:2212.08410,2022. oflargelanguagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2306.08543,2023.
[212] C.-Y.Hsieh,C.-L.Li,C.-K.Yeh,H.Nakhost,Y.Fujii,A.Ratner, [234] R.Agarwal,N.Vieillard,Y.Zhou,P.Stanczyk,S.Ramos,M.Geist,
R. Krishna, C.-Y. Lee, and T. Pfister, “Distilling step-by-step! and O. Bachem, “Generalized knowledge distillation for auto-
outperforming larger language models with less training data regressive language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13649,
andsmallermodelsizes,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2305.02301,2023. 2023.
[213] S. Wadhwa, S. Amir, and B. C. Wallace, “Revisiting relation [235] S.Padmanabhan,Y.Onoe,M.J.Zhang,G.Durrett,andE.Choi,
extraction in the era of large language models,” arXiv preprint “Propagating knowledge updates to lms through distillation,”
arXiv:2305.05003,2023. arXivpreprintarXiv:2306.09306,2023.
[214] N. Ho, L. Schmid, and S.-Y. Yun, “Large language models are [236] M.Kim,S.Lee,J.Lee,S.Hong,D.-S.Chang,W.Sung,andJ.Choi,
reasoningteachers,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2212.10071,2022. “Token-scaled logit distillation for ternary weight generative
[215] K. Shridhar, A. Stolfo, and M. Sachan, “Distilling reasoning languagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2308.06744,2023.
capabilities into smaller language models,” in Findings of the [237] C. Zhang, D. Song, Z. Ye, and Y. Gao, “Towards the law
AssociationforComputationalLinguistics:ACL2023,2023,pp.7059– of capacity gap in distilling language models,” arXiv preprint
7073. arXiv:2311.07052,2023.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 43
[238] Z.Dai,Z.Yang,Y.Yang,J.Carbonell,Q.V.Le,andR.Salakhutdi- [262] H.Wang,Z.Wu,Z.Liu,H.Cai,L.Zhu,C.Gan,andS.Han,“Hat:
nov,“Transformer-xl:Attentivelanguagemodelsbeyondafixed- Hardware-awaretransformersforefficientnaturallanguagepro-
lengthcontext,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1901.02860,2019. cessing,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2005.14187,2020.
[239] R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, and I. Sutskever, “Generat- [263] P. Ren, Y. Xiao, X. Chang, P.-Y. Huang, Z. Li, X. Chen, and
ing long sequences with sparse transformers,” arXiv preprint X.Wang,“Acomprehensivesurveyofneuralarchitecturesearch:
arXiv:1904.10509,2019. Challenges and solutions,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),
[240] S.Sukhbaatar,E.Grave,P.Bojanowski,andA.Joulin,“Adaptive vol.54,no.4,pp.1–34,2021.
attentionspanintransformers,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1905.07799, [264] Y. Liu, Y. Sun, B. Xue, M. Zhang, G. G. Yen, and K. C. Tan,
2019. “A survey on evolutionary neural architecture search,” IEEE
[241] G.M.Correia,V.Niculae,andA.F.Martins,“Adaptivelysparse transactionsonneuralnetworksandlearningsystems,2021.
transformers,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1909.00015,2019. [265] T.Elsken,J.H.Metzen,andF.Hutter,“Neuralarchitecturesearch:
Asurvey,”TheJournalofMachineLearningResearch,vol.20,no.1,
[242] Z.Ye,Q.Guo,Q.Gan,X.Qiu,andZ.Zhang,“Bp-transformer:
pp.1997–2017,2019.
Modelling long-range context via binary partitioning,” arXiv
preprintarXiv:1911.04070,2019. [266] A. Wan, X. Dai, P. Zhang, Z. He, Y. Tian, S. Xie, B. Wu, M. Yu,
T.Xu,K.Chenetal.,“Fbnetv2:Differentiableneuralarchitecture
[243] J. Qiu, H. Ma, O. Levy, S. W.-t. Yih, S. Wang, and J. Tang,
searchforspatialandchanneldimensions,”inProceedingsofthe
“Blockwise self-attention for long document understanding,”
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
arXivpreprintarXiv:1911.02972,2019.
2020,pp.12965–12974.
[244] I.Beltagy,M.E.Peters,andA.Cohan,“Longformer:Thelong-
[267] B. Wu, X. Dai, P. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Sun, Y. Wu, Y. Tian,
documenttransformer,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2004.05150,2020.
P.Vajda,Y.Jia,andK.Keutzer,“Fbnet:Hardware-awareefficient
[245] N. Kitaev, Ł. Kaiser, and A. Levskaya, “Reformer: The efficient
convnet design via differentiable neural architecture search,”
transformer,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2001.04451,2020.
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
[246] M. Zaheer, G. Guruganesh, K. A. Dubey, J. Ainslie, C. Alberti, patternrecognition,2019,pp.10734–10742.
S. Ontanon, P. Pham, A. Ravula, Q. Wang, L. Yang et al., “Big [268] D.So,Q.Le,andC.Liang,“Theevolvedtransformer,”inInterna-
bird: Transformers for longer sequences,” Advances in neural tionalconferenceonmachinelearning. PMLR,2019,pp.5877–5886.
informationprocessingsystems,vol.33,pp.17283–17297,2020. [269] Y. Zhao, L. Dong, Y. Shen, Z. Zhang, F. Wei, and
[247] Y. Tay, D. Bahri, L. Yang, D. Metzler, and D.-C. Juan, “Sparse W. Chen, “Memory-efficient differentiable transformer architec-
sinkhornattention,”inInternationalConferenceonMachineLearn- turesearch,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2105.14669,2021.
ing. PMLR,2020,pp.9438–9447. [270] H.Liu,K.Simonyan,andY.Yang,“Darts:Differentiablearchitec-
[248] X. Li, Y. Meng, M. Zhou, Q. Han, F. Wu, and J. Li, “Sac: turesearch,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1806.09055,2018.
Accelerating and structuring self-attention via sparse adaptive [271] J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown, B. Chess,
connection,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, J. Wu, and D. Amodei,
vol.33,pp.16997–17008,2020. “Scaling laws for neural language models,” arXiv preprint
[249] H.Ren,H.Dai,Z.Dai,M.Yang,J.Leskovec,D.Schuurmans,and arXiv:2001.08361,2020.
B.Dai,“Combiner:Fullattentiontransformerwithsparsecom- [272] J. Hestness, S. Narang, N. Ardalani, G. Diamos, H. Jun,
putationcost,”AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems, H. Kianinejad, M. M. A. Patwary, Y. Yang, and Y. Zhou,
vol.34,pp.22470–22482,2021. “Deeplearningscalingispredictable,empirically,”arXivpreprint
[250] A.Roy,M.Saffar,A.Vaswani,andD.Grangier,“Efficientcontent- arXiv:1712.00409,2017.
basedsparseattentionwithroutingtransformers,”Transactionsof [273] C.XuandJ.McAuley,“Asurveyondynamicneuralnetworks
theAssociationforComputationalLinguistics,vol.9,pp.53–68,2021. fornaturallanguageprocessing,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2202.07101,
[251] A. Katharopoulos, A. Vyas, N. Pappas, and F. Fleuret, “Trans- 2022.
formers are rnns: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear [274] Y.-S.Chuang,Y.Xie,H.Luo,Y.Kim,J.R.Glass,andP.He,“Dola:
attention,”inInternationalconferenceonmachinelearning. PMLR, Decoding by contrasting layers improves factuality in large
2020,pp.5156–5165. language models,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2309.03883, 2023. [Online].
[252] K.Choromanski,V.Likhosherstov,D.Dohan,X.Song,A.Gane, Available:https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261582463
T. Sarlos, P. Hawkins, J. Davis, A. Mohiuddin, L. Kaiser [275] J. Xin, R. Tang, J. Lee, Y. Yu, and J. J. Lin, “Deebert: Dynamic
et al., “Rethinking attention with performers,” arXiv preprint earlyexiting foracceleratingbertinference,”inAnnualMeeting
arXiv:2009.14794,2020. of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. [Online].
[253] Y. Xiong, Z. Zeng, R. Chakraborty, M. Tan, G. Fung, Y. Li, and Available:https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:216552850
V. Singh, “Nystro¨mformer: A nystro¨m-based algorithm for ap- [276] W. Liu, P. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, H. Deng, and
proximatingself-attention,”inProceedingsoftheAAAIConference Q. Ju, “Fastbert: a self-distilling bert with adaptive inference
onArtificialIntelligence,vol.35,no.16,2021,pp.14138–14148. time,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2004.02178, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:214802887
[254] W.Hua,Z.Dai,H.Liu,andQ.Le,“Transformerqualityinlinear
time,” in International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, [277] S.Geng,P.Gao,Z.Fu,andY.Zhang,“Romebert:Robusttraining
of multi-exit bert,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2101.09755, 2021. [Online].
2022,pp.9099–9117.
Available:https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:231698881
[255] I. Han, R. Jarayam, A. Karbasi, V. Mirrokni, D. P. Woodruff,
[278] J.Wang,K.Chen,G.Chen,L.Shou,andJ.McAuley,“Skipbert:
andA.Zandieh,“Hyperattention:Long-contextattentioninnear-
Efficient inference with shallow layer skipping,” in Annual
lineartime,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.05869,2023.
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022.
[256] Z. Shen, M. Zhang, H. Zhao, S. Yi, and H. Li, “Efficient atten-
[Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
tion: Attention with linear complexities,” in Proceedings of the
248780497
IEEE/CVFwinterconferenceonapplicationsofcomputervision,2021,
[279] W. Zhu, “Leebert: Learned early exit for bert with cross-
pp.3531–3539.
level optimization,” in Annual Meeting of the Association
[257] A. Rahimi and B. Recht, “Random features for large-scale ker-
for Computational Linguistics, 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
nel machines,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:236459809
vol.20,2007.
[280] J. Kong, J. Wang, L.-C. Yu, and X. Zhang, “Accelerating
[258] S. Wang, B. Z. Li, M. Khabsa, H. Fang, and H. Ma, “Lin- inference for pretrained language models by unified multi-
former: Self-attention with linear complexity,” arXiv preprint perspective early exiting,” in International Conference on
arXiv:2006.04768,2020. Computational Linguistics, 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
[259] L.D.Lingle,“Transformer-vq:Linear-timetransformersviavec- //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:252818912
torquantization,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2309.16354,2023. [281] D. Ye, Y. Lin, Y. Huang, and M. Sun, “Tr-bert: Dynamic token
[260] T. Dao, D. Fu, S. Ermon, A. Rudra, and C. Re´, “Flashattention: reduction for accelerating bert inference,” in North American
Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with io-awareness,” Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
16344–16359,2022. 235097557
[261] T.Dao,“Flashattention-2:Fasterattentionwithbetterparallelism [282] D. Zeng, N. Du, T. Wang, Y. Xu, T. Lei, Z. Chen,
andworkpartitioning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2307.08691,2023. and C. Cui, “Learning to skip for language modeling,”

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 44
ArXiv, vol. abs/2311.15436, 2023. [Online]. Available: https: [302] Y.Xie,S.Huang,T.Chen,andF.Wei,“Moec:Mixtureofexpert
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:265456419 clusters,”inProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelli-
[283] Y.Wang,K.Chen,H.Tan,andK.Guo,“Tabi:Anefficientmulti- gence,vol.37,no.11,2023,pp.13807–13815.
level inference system for large language models,” Proceedings [303] M.Lewis,S.Bhosale,T.Dettmers,N.Goyal,andL.Zettlemoyer,
of the Eighteenth European Conference on Computer Systems, 2023. “Base layers: Simplifying training of large, sparse models,” in
[Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2021, pp.
258508784 6265–6274.
[284] L. Chen, M. A. Zaharia, and J. Y. Zou, “Frugalgpt: How to [304] A. Clark, D. De Las Casas, A. Guy, A. Mensch, M. Paganini,
use large language models while reducing cost and improving J.Hoffmann,B.Damoc,B.Hechtman,T.Cai,S.Borgeaudetal.,
performance,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2305.05176, 2023. [Online]. “Unified scaling laws for routed language models,” in Interna-
Available:https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:258564349 tional Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 4057–
[285] J. Zhang, R. Krishna, A. H. Awadallah, and C. Wang, 4086.
“Ecoassistant: Using llm assistant more affordably and [305] S. Roller, S. Sukhbaatar, J. Weston et al., “Hash layers for large
accurately,”ArXiv,vol.abs/2310.03046,2023.[Online].Available: sparsemodels,”AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:263671677 vol.34,pp.17555–17566,2021.
[286] B. Zhu, Y. Sheng, L. Zheng, C. W. Barrett, M. I. Jordan, and [306] C. N. dos Santos, J. Lee-Thorp, I. Noble, C.-C. Chang, and
J. Jiao, “On optimal caching and model multiplexing for large D. Uthus, “Memory augmented language models through
model inference,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2306.02003, 2023. [Online]. mixture of word experts,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2311.10768, 2023.
Available:https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259075212 [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
[287] M.Yue,J.Zhao,M.Zhang,L.Du,andZ.Yao,“Largelanguage 265295488
model cascades with mixture of thoughts representations [307] X. Ren, P. Zhou, X. Meng, X. Huang, Y. Wang, W. Wang, P. Li,
for cost-efficient reasoning,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2310.03094, 2023. X.Zhang,A.V.Podolskiy,G.Arshinov,A.Bout,I.Piontkovskaya,
[Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID: J. Wei, X. Jiang, T. Su, Q. Liu, and J. Yao, “Pangu-
263671564 σ: Towards trillion parameter language model with sparse
heterogeneous computing,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2303.10845, 2023.
[288] D.PatelandG.Wong,“Gpt-4architecture,infrastructure,train-
[Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
ingdataset,costs,vision,moe,”2023,https://www.semianalysis.
257666647
com/p/gpt-4-architecture-infrastructure.
[308] J. Li, Z. Sun, X. He, L. Zeng, Y. Lin, E. Li, B. Zheng,
[289] A. Q. Jiang, A. Sablayrolles, A. Roux, A. Mensch, B. Savary,
R. Zhao, and X. Chen, “Locmoe: A low-overhead moe for
C.Bamford,D.S.Chaplot,D.d.l.Casas,E.B.Hanna,F.Bressand
large language model training,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
etal.,“Mixtralofexperts,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2401.04088,2024.
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:267212059
[290] S. Rajbhandari, C. Li, Z. Yao, M. Zhang, R. Y. Aminabadi,
[309] S.Zuo,X.Liu,J.Jiao,Y.J.Kim,H.Hassan,R.Zhang,T.Zhao,and
A. A. Awan, J. Rasley, and Y. He, “Deepspeed-moe: Advanc-
J. Gao, “Taming sparsely activated transformer with stochastic
ing mixture-of-experts inference and training to power next-
experts,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2110.04260,2021.
generationaiscale,”inInternationalConferenceonMachineLearn-
[310] Y.J.Kim,A.A.Awan,A.Muzio,A.F.C.Salinas,L.Lu,A.Hendy,
ing. PMLR,2022,pp.18332–18346.
S.Rajbhandari,Y.He,andH.H.Awadalla,“Scalableandefficient
[291] D. Dai, C. Deng, C. Zhao, R. X. Xu, H. Gao, D. Chen,
moe training for multitask multilingual models,” arXiv preprint
J. Li, W. Zeng, X. Yu, Y. Wu, Z. Xie, Y. K. Li, P. Huang,
arXiv:2109.10465,2021.
F.Luo,C.Ruan,Z.Sui,andW.Liang,“Deepseekmoe:Towards
[311] C.Riquelme,J.Puigcerver,B.Mustafa,M.Neumann,R.Jenatton,
ultimate expert specialization in mixture-of-experts language
A. Susano Pinto, D. Keysers, and N. Houlsby, “Scaling vision
models,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2401.06066, 2024. [Online]. Available:
with sparse mixture of experts,” Advances in Neural Information
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:266933338
ProcessingSystems,vol.34,pp.8583–8595,2021.
[292] N.Shazeer,A.Mirhoseini,K.Maziarz,A.Davis,Q.Le,G.Hinton,
[312] B.Zoph,I.Bello,S.Kumar,N.Du,Y.Huang,J.Dean,N.Shazeer,
andJ.Dean,“Outrageouslylargeneuralnetworks:Thesparsely-
andW.Fedus,“St-moe:Designingstableandtransferablesparse
gated mixture-of-experts layer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538,
expertmodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2202.08906,2022.
2017.
[313] H.Hazimeh,Z.Zhao,A.Chowdhery,M.Sathiamoorthy,Y.Chen,
[293] D. Lepikhin, H. Lee, Y. Xu, D. Chen, O. Firat, Y. Huang,
R. Mazumder, L. Hong, and E. Chi, “Dselect-k: Differentiable
M. Krikun, N. Shazeer, and Z. Chen, “Gshard: Scaling giant
selection in the mixture of experts with applications to multi-
modelswithconditionalcomputationandautomaticsharding,”
tasklearning,”AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,
arXivpreprintarXiv:2006.16668,2020.
vol.34,pp.29335–29347,2021.
[294] W.Fedus,B.Zoph,andN.Shazeer,“Switchtransformers:Scaling
[314] N. Du, Y. Huang, A. M. Dai, S. Tong, D. Lepikhin, Y. Xu,
totrillionparametermodelswithsimpleandefficientsparsity,”
M.Krikun,Y.Zhou,A.W.Yu,O.Firatetal.,“Glam:Efficientscal-
TheJournalofMachineLearningResearch,vol.23,no.1,pp.5232–
ingoflanguagemodelswithmixture-of-experts,”inInternational
5270,2022.
ConferenceonMachineLearning. PMLR,2022,pp.5547–5569.
[295] Y. Zhou, T. Lei, H. Liu, N. Du, Y. Huang, V. Zhao, A. M. [315] M.Artetxe,S.Bhosale,N.Goyal,T.Mihaylov,M.Ott,S.Shleifer,
Dai, Q. V. Le, J. Laudon et al., “Mixture-of-experts with expert X. V. Lin, J. Du, S. Iyer, R. Pasunuru et al., “Efficient large
choicerouting,”AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems, scalelanguagemodelingwithmixturesofexperts,”arXivpreprint
vol.35,pp.7103–7114,2022. arXiv:2112.10684,2021.
[296] A. Yang, J. Lin, R. Men, C. Zhou, L. Jiang, X. Jia, A. Wang, [316] D.Dai,L.Dong,S.Ma,B.Zheng,Z.Sui,B.Chang,andF.Wei,
J. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Li et al., “M6-t: Exploring sparse expert “Stablemoe:Stableroutingstrategyformixtureofexperts,”arXiv
modelsandbeyond,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2105.15082,2021. preprintarXiv:2204.08396,2022.
[297] Y.Zhou,N.Du,Y.Huang,D.Peng,C.Lan,D.Huang,S.Shakeri, [317] M. R. Costa-jussa`, J. Cross, O. C¸elebi, M. Elbayad, K. Heafield,
D.So,A.M.Dai,Y.Luetal.,“Brainformers:Tradingsimplicity K.Heffernan,E.Kalbassi,J.Lam,D.Licht,J.Maillardetal.,“No
for efficiency,” in International Conference on Machine Learning. language left behind: Scaling human-centered machine transla-
PMLR,2023,pp.42531–42542. tion,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2207.04672,2022.
[298] R. A. Jacobs, M. I. Jordan, S. J. Nowlan, and G. E. Hinton, [318] M. Tan and Q. Le, “Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for
“Adaptivemixturesoflocalexperts,”Neuralcomputation,vol.3, convolutional neural networks,” in International conference on
no.1,pp.79–87,1991. machinelearning. PMLR,2019,pp.6105–6114.
[299] M.I.JordanandR.A.Jacobs,“Hierarchicalmixturesofexperts [319] O. Press, N. A. Smith, and O. Levy, “Improving trans-
andtheemalgorithm,”Neuralcomputation,vol.6,no.2,pp.181– former models by reordering their sublayers,” arXiv preprint
214,1994. arXiv:1911.03864,2019.
[300] A.GravesandA.Graves,“Longshort-termmemory,”Supervised [320] D. So, W. Man´ke, H. Liu, Z. Dai, N. Shazeer, and Q. V. Le,
sequencelabellingwithrecurrentneuralnetworks,pp.37–45,2012. “Searching for efficient transformers for language modeling,”
[301] Z. Chi, L. Dong, S. Huang, D. Dai, S. Ma, B. Patra, S. Singhal, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp.
P.Bajaj,X.Song,X.-L.Maoetal.,“Ontherepresentationcollapse 6010–6022,2021.
of sparse mixture of experts,” Advances in Neural Information [321] B.ZophandQ.V.Le,“Neuralarchitecturesearchwithreinforce-
ProcessingSystems,vol.35,pp.34600–34613,2022. mentlearning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1611.01578,2016.

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 45
[322] X. Nie, X. Miao, S. Cao, L. Ma, Q. Liu, J. Xue, Y. Miao, Y. Liu, [343] S. Dou, E. Zhou, Y. Liu, S. Gao, J. Zhao, W. Shen, Y. Zhou,
Z.Yang,andB.Cui,“Evomoe:Anevolutionalmixture-of-experts Z. Xi, X. Wang, X. Fan, S. Pu, J. Zhu, R. Zheng, T. Gui,
training framework via dense-to-sparse gate,” arXiv preprint Q. Zhang, and X. Huang, “Loramoe: Revolutionizing mixture
arXiv:2112.14397,2021. of experts for maintaining world knowledge in language
[323] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and model alignment,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2312.09979, 2023. [Online].
R.Salakhutdinov,“Dropout:asimplewaytopreventneuralnet- Available:https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:266335873
works from overfitting,” The journal of machine learning research, [344] Y. Gui, X. Yan, P. Yin, H. Yang, and J. Cheng, “Spt:
vol.15,no.1,pp.1929–1958,2014. Fine-tuningtransformer-basedlanguagemodelsefficientlywith
[324] R. Liu, Y. J. Kim, A. Muzio, and H. Hassan, “Gating dropout: sparsification,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2312.10365, 2023. [Online].
Communication-efficient regularization for sparsely activated Available:https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:266348310
transformers,” in International Conference on Machine Learning. [345] W.Niu,J.Guan,Y.Wang,G.Agrawal,andB.Ren,“Dnnfusion:
PMLR,2022,pp.13782–13792. acceleratingdeepneuralnetworksexecutionwithadvancedop-
[325] Z.Zhang,Y.Gu,X.Han,S.Chen,C.Xiao,Z.Sun,Y.Yao,F.Qi, eratorfusion,”inProceedingsofthe42ndACMSIGPLANInterna-
J.Guan,P.Keetal.,“Cpm-2:Large-scalecost-effectivepre-trained tionalConferenceonProgrammingLanguageDesignandImplementa-
languagemodels,”AIOpen,vol.2,pp.216–224,2021. tion,2021,pp.883–898.
[326] F. Xue, Z. Zheng, Y. Fu, J. Ni, Z. Zheng, W. Zhou, and Y. You, [346] R. Y. Aminabadi, S. Rajbhandari, A. A. Awan, C. Li, D. Li,
“Openmoe:Anearlyeffortonopenmixture-of-expertslanguage E. Zheng, O. Ruwase, S. Smith, M. Zhang, J. Rasley et al.,
models,”2024. “Deepspeed-inference:enablingefficientinferenceoftransformer
[327] T. Chen, S. Huang, Y. Xie, B. Jiao, D. Jiang, H. Zhou, J. Li, modelsatunprecedentedscale,”inSC22:InternationalConference
andF.Wei,“Task-specificexpertpruningforsparsemixture-of- forHighPerformanceComputing,Networking,StorageandAnalysis.
experts,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2206.00277,2022. IEEE,2022,pp.1–15.
[328] Z.-F.Gao,P.Liu,W.X.Zhao,Z.-Y.Lu,andJ.-R.Wen,“Parameter- [347] J.Fang,Y.Yu,C.Zhao,andJ.Zhou,“Turbotransformers:aneffi-
efficientmixture-of-expertsarchitectureforpre-trainedlanguage cientgpuservingsystemfortransformermodels,”inProceedings
models,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2203.01104,2022. ofthe26thACMSIGPLANSymposiumonPrinciplesandPracticeof
[329] S. Zuo, Q. Zhang, C. Liang, P. He, T. Zhao, and W. Chen, ParallelProgramming,2021,pp.389–402.
“Moebert:fromberttomixture-of-expertsviaimportance-guided [348] Y. Zhai, C. Jiang, L. Wang, X. Jia, S. Zhang, Z. Chen, X. Liu,
adaptation,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2204.07675,2022. andY.Zhu,“Bytetransformer:Ahigh-performancetransformer
[330] P.Molchanov,A.Mallya,S.Tyree,I.Frosio,andJ.Kautz,“Impor- boosted for variable-length inputs,” in 2023 IEEE International
tance estimation for neural network pruning,” in Proceedings of Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS). IEEE,
theIEEE/CVFconferenceoncomputervisionandpatternrecognition, 2023,pp.344–355.
2019,pp.11264–11272. [349] Y.Sheng,L.Zheng,B.Yuan,Z.Li,M.Ryabinin,B.Chen,P.Liang,
[331] Z.Zhang,Y.Lin,Z.Liu,P.Li,M.Sun,andJ.Zhou,“Moefication: C.Re´,I.Stoica,andC.Zhang,“Flexgen:High-throughputgen-
Transformerfeed-forwardlayersaremixturesofexperts,”arXiv erative inference of large language models with a single gpu,”
preprintarXiv:2110.01786,2021. inInternationalConferenceonMachineLearning. PMLR,2023,pp.
[332] R. Csord’as, K. Irie, and J. Schmidhuber, “Approximating 31094–31116.
two-layer feedforward networks for efficient transformers,” [350] Y. Song, Z. Mi, H. Xie, and H. Chen, “Powerinfer: Fast large
ArXiv, vol. abs/2310.10837, 2023. [Online]. Available: https: language model serving with a consumer-grade gpu,” arXiv
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264172384 preprintarXiv:2312.12456,2023.
[333] R.Csord’as,P.Piekos,K.Irie,andJ.Schmidhuber,“Switchhead: [351] L. Zheng, Z. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Zhuang, Z. Chen, Y. Huang,
Accelerating transformers with mixture-of-experts attention,” Y.Wang,Y.Xu,D.Zhuo,E.P.Xingetal.,“Alpa:Automatinginter-
ArXiv, vol. abs/2312.07987, 2023. [Online]. Available: https: and{Intra-Operator}parallelismfordistributeddeeplearning,”
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:266191825 in 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
[334] I. O. Tolstikhin, N. Houlsby, A. Kolesnikov, L. Beyer, X. Zhai, Implementation(OSDI22),2022,pp.559–578.
T.Unterthiner,J.Yung,A.Steiner,D.Keysers,J.Uszkoreitetal.,
[352] M. Shoeybi, M. Patwary, R. Puri, P. LeGresley, J. Casper, and
“Mlp-mixer: An all-mlp architecture for vision,” Advances in
B. Catanzaro, “Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parame-
neural information processing systems, vol. 34, pp. 24261–24272,
ter language models using model parallelism,” arXiv preprint
2021.
arXiv:1909.08053,2019.
[335] J. Lee-Thorp and J. Ainslie, “Sparse mixers: Combining moe
[353] S. Li, H. Liu, Z. Bian, J. Fang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, B. Wang, and
and mixing to build a more efficient bert,” arXiv preprint
Y. You, “Colossal-ai: A unified deep learning system for large-
arXiv:2205.12399,2022.
scale parallel training,” in Proceedings of the 52nd International
[336] P.Yu,M.Artetxe,M.Ott,S.Shleifer,H.Gong,V.Stoyanov,and
ConferenceonParallelProcessing,2023,pp.766–775.
X. Li, “Efficient language modeling with sparse all-mlp,” arXiv
[354] M. Baines, S. Bhosale, V. Caggiano, N. Goyal, S. Goyal,
preprintarXiv:2203.06850,2022.
M. Ott, B. Lefaudeux, V. Liptchinsky, M. Rabbat, S. Sheif-
[337] Y.Wang,S.Agarwal,S.Mukherjee,X.Liu,J.Gao,A.H.Awadal-
fer et al., “Fairscale: A general purpose modular pytorch li-
lah,andJ.Gao,“Adamix:Mixture-of-adaptationsforparameter-
brary for high performance and large scale training,” 2021,
efficientmodeltuning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2210.17451,2022.
https://github.com/facebookresearch/fairscale.
[338] N.Houlsby,A.Giurgiu,S.Jastrzebski,B.Morrone,Q.DeLarous-
[355] G.Lai,“Pax:Ajax-basedmachinelearningframeworkforlarge
silhe, A. Gesmundo, M. Attariyan, and S. Gelly, “Parameter-
scalemodels.”https://github.com/google/paxml.
efficienttransferlearningfornlp,”inInternationalConferenceon
[356] J. Rasley, S. Rajbhandari, O. Ruwase, and Y. He, “Deepspeed:
MachineLearning. PMLR,2019,pp.2790–2799.
Systemoptimizationsenabletrainingdeeplearningmodelswith
[339] E.J.Hu,Y.Shen,P.Wallis,Z.Allen-Zhu,Y.Li,S.Wang,L.Wang,
over 100 billion parameters,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM
and W. Chen, “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
models,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2106.09685,2021.
Mining,2020,pp.3505–3506.
[340] S. Diao, T. Xu, R. Xu, J. Wang, and T. Zhang, “Mixture-of-
[357] T. M. M. Team, “composer,” https://github.com/mosaicml/
domain-adapters: Decoupling and injecting domain knowledge
composer/,2021.
to pre-trained language models’ memories,” in Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023. [Online]. [358] A. Pham, C. Yang, S. Sheng, S. Zhao, S. Lee, B. Jiang, F. Dong,
Available:https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:259108831 X.Guan,andF.Ming,“Openllm:Operatingllmsinproduction,”
2023,https://github.com/bentoml/OpenLLM.
[341] R. Li, G. Murray, and G. Carenini, “Mixture-of-linguistic-
experts adapters for improving and interpreting pre-trained [359] T. A. B. Team, “Rayllm,” https://github.com/ray-project/ray-
language models,” in Conference on Empirical Methods in llm.
Natural Language Processing, 2023. [Online]. Available: https: [360] M. team, “MLC-LLM,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:264487239 //github.com/mlc-ai/mlc-llm
[342] Y.Zhu,N.Wichers,C.-C.Lin,X.Wang,T.Chen,L.Shu,H.Lu, [361] T.W.J.Team,“Saxml,”https://github.com/google/saxml.
C. Liu, L. Luo, J. Chen, and L. Meng, “Sira: Sparse mixture of [362] K. Yang, Z. Liu, and P. Cheng, “MOSEC: Model Serving
lowrankadaptation,”ArXiv,vol.abs/2311.09179,2023.[Online]. made Efficient in the Cloud,” 2021. [Online]. Available:
Available:https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:265213347 https://github.com/mosecorg/mosec

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 46
[363] T. D. K. Team, “Llm foundry,”
https://github.com/mosaicml/llm-foundry.
[364] TensorFlow,“Tensorflowxla,”https://www.tensorflow.org/xla.
Layer Norm Adapter +
[365] T. Chen, T. Moreau, Z. Jiang, L. Zheng, E. Yan, H. Shen,
Layer
M.Cowan,L.Wang,Y.Hu,L.Cezeetal.,“{TVM}:Anautomated Transformer
+
{End-to-End} optimizing compiler for deep learning,” in 13th Layer
USENIXSymposiumonOperatingSystemsDesignandImplementa- Adapter
tion(OSDI18),2018,pp.578–594. Feedforward
2x Feed-forward up-project
[366] X. Jiang, H. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Wu, L. Wang, B. Zou, Y. Yang,
layer
Z. Cui, Y. Cai, T. Yu et al., “Mnn: A universal and efficient
inference engine,” Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems,
Layer Norm Nonlinearity
vol.2,pp.1–13,2020.
[367] Pytorch,“Pytorchjit,”https://github.com/pytorch/torchdynamo.
+
[368] N.Houlsby,A.Giurgiu,S.Jastrzebski,B.Morrone,Q.DeLarous-
silhe, A. Gesmundo, M. Attariyan, and S. Gelly, “Parameter-
Adapter
efficienttransferlearningfornlp,”inInternationalConferenceon Feedforward
Feed-forward down-project
MachineLearning. PMLR,2019,pp.2790–2799. layer
[369] A.Ru¨ckle´,G.Geigle,M.Glockner,T.Beck,J.Pfeiffer,N.Reimers,
Multi-head
andI.Gurevych,“Adapterdrop:Ontheefficiencyofadaptersin attention
transformers,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2010.11918,2020.
[370] J. Pfeiffer, A. Kamath, A. Ru¨ckle´, K. Cho, and I. Gurevych,
“Adapterfusion: Non-destructive task composition for transfer
learning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2005.00247,2020. Fig.10:Architectureoftheadaptermoduleanditsintegra-
[371] S.He,L.Ding,D.Dong,M.Zhang,andD.Tao,“Sparseadapter:
tionwiththeTransformer.
An easy approach for improving the parameter-efficiency of
adapters,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2210.04284,2022.
[372] X. L. Li and P. Liang, “Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous
promptsforgeneration,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2101.00190,2021.
TheAdapter[368]isthepioneeringworkoftheadditive
[373] E. B. Zaken, S. Ravfogel, and Y. Goldberg, “Bitfit: Simple
parameter-efficient fine-tuning for transformer-based masked methods. As shown in Fig. 10, the Adapter fine-tunes the
language-models,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2106.10199,2021. model by inserting an adapter module between the feed-
[374] E.J.Hu,Y.Shen,P.Wallis,Z.Allen-Zhu,Y.Li,S.Wang,L.Wang,
forward layer and skip-connection within the Transformer
and W. Chen, “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language
models,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2106.09685,2021. layer. The Adapter module is a small fully-connected net-
[375] T. Dettmers, A. Pagnoni, A. Holtzman, and L. Zettlemoyer, work consisting of an upper projection layer, a nonlinear
“Qlora: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms,” arXiv preprint layer, a lower projection layer, and an additional skip-
arXiv:2305.14314,2023.
connection. Whenever a new downstream task arises, we
[376] Y. Xu, L. Xie, X. Gu, X. Chen, H. Chang, H. Zhang, Z. Chen,
X. Zhang, and Q. Tian, “Qa-lora: Quantization-aware low- canmitigatetheproblemoffullfine-tuningandcatastrophic
rank adaptation of large language models,” arXiv preprint forgetting by adding an adapter module to the model to
arXiv:2309.14717,2023.
produceaneasilyscalabledownstreammodel.Theadapter
[377] M. Valipour, M. Rezagholizadeh, I. Kobyzev, and A. Ghodsi,
“Dylora: Parameter efficient tuning of pre-trained models us- ideahasbeenwidelyusedandmanyadaptervariantshave
ing dynamic search-free low-rank adaptation,” arXiv preprint beenproposed.
arXiv:2210.07558,2022.
There are two main strategies for integrating multi-task
[378] Q.Zhang,M.Chen,A.Bukharin,P.He,Y.Cheng,W.Chen,and
T.Zhao,“Adaptivebudgetallocationforparameter-efficientfine- knowledge: sequential fine-tuning and multi-task learning.
tuning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2303.10512,2023. However,bothstrategieshavespecificproblems.Sequential
[379] R. Karimi Mahabadi, J. Henderson, and S. Ruder, “Compacter: fine-tuningrequirespriorknowledgetodeterminetheorder
Efficient low-rank hypercomplex adapter layers,” Advances in
oftaskswhichcanresultinthemodelforgettingknowledge
NeuralInformationProcessingSystems,vol.34,pp.1022–1035,2021.
[380] V. Lialin, V. Deshpande, and A. Rumshisky, “Scaling down learned from previous tasks. On the other hand, multi-task
to scale up: A guide to parameter-efficient fine-tuning,” arXiv learningmakesbalancingdatafromvarioustaskschalleng-
preprintarXiv:2303.15647,2023.
ingasdifferenttaskscaninterferewitheachother.Asare-
sult,bothmethodsfacechallengesineffectivelytransferring
APPENDIX A knowledge. [370]proposes a variant called AdapterFusion,
PARAMETER-EFFICIENT FINETUNING (PEFT) which effectively mitigates the above problems in multi-
tasktrainingusingatwo-stagelearningalgorithm,achieves
When training a large language model for specific tasks,
effectiveknowledgesharingacrossmultipletasks,andout-
it is often faster and more efficient to fine-tune a pre-
performsfullyfine-tunedmodelsonasingletargettask.
trainedmodel.Therearetwotypesoffine-tuningmethods:
Typically, fine-tuning a Transformer with the adapter
full fine-tuning and parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT).
is 60% faster than full fine-tuning in training but 4-6%
However, full fine-tuning can be expensive and may cause
slowerininference.TheAdapterDropmethodproposedby
catastrophicforgetfulnessproblems.Toaddresstheseissues,
[369]canefficientlyanddynamicallyremoveadapterswith
PEFTwasdeveloped.PEFTmethodscanbecategorizedinto
minimal impact on task performance. This dramatically
threecategories:additive,selective,andreparameterization.
improves the model’s efficiency during backpropagation
(training)andforwardpropagation(inference).
A.1 Additivemethods
Existing methods increase the bottleneck dimension to
Themainideabehindadditivemethodsistoaddadditional matchtheperformanceoffullfine-tuningasmuchaspossi-
parameterstothemodelwhilekeepingtheoriginalparam- blebecausethenumberoftrainableparametersdetermines
etersfixedandtrainthemodelbyfine-tuningtheadditional theadapter’scapacity.However,thesemethodsincreasethe
parameters[368],[369],[370],[371],[372]. overallparametercountandFLOPs,violatingtheadapter’s

JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2015 47
originalintention.[371]combinestheadapterwithpruning has developed a unique algorithm called DyLoRA based
toproposeSparseAdapter,usingafrustratedlyeasysetting on LoRA. DyLora has developed a new algorithm called
calledLarge-Sparse,whicheffectivelyimprovesthecapacity DyLoRA based on LoRA. DyLora has developed a new
oftheadapterunderagivenparameterbudgetandcanalso algorithm called DyLoRA based on LoRA. It dynamically
be effectively applied to other types of adapter methods, searches for the optimal rank through LoRA selects it, and
suchasLoRA. performs dynamic inference without incurring additional
Another similar class of additive methods is Soft costs.
Prompts, of which the most representative work is Prefix- Another related work is AdaLoRA [378], which adap-
Tuning[372],whicheffectivelyavoidsdatacross-pollination tively assigns parameter budgets based on importance
and dramatically reduces the number of parameters by scores. In AdaLoRA, the incremental update of the weight
adding a continuous, independent, learnable, task-specific matrix is parameterized in the form of a singular value
prefix to the input. At the same time, it can easily decomposition. The parameter budget is dynamically al-
switchtasksandrealizeprocessingexamplesfrommultiple located among the total matrices by manipulating the dis-
users/tasksinonebatch. tinct values according to the new importance metrics. This
Overall, while additive methods add additional param- method effectively improves model performance and pa-
eters to the model and inevitably bring about additional rameterefficiency.
inference delays, they significantly improve training speed LoRAhasanotheradvantage:itcanbenaturallyorthog-
and memory efficiency by reducing the gradient size and onalized to other model compression acceleration meth-
optimizerstate. ods. As mentioned earlier, QLoRA [375], which combines
LoRA with quantization, dramatically reduces the mem-
A.2 Selectivemethods ory footprint during training, realizing the advancement
of fine-tuning 65B parametric models on a single 48GB
Selectivemethodsselectaportionoftheparametersonthe
memory GPU, making it possible for more researchers to
originalmodelforfine-tuningandkeeptherestfrozen,such
participate in the study of large models. However, QLoRA
asBitFit[373],whichselectivelyfine-tunesonlythemodel’s
onlyconsidersresourcesattraining,notinference.Although
bias terms. It is more suitable for cases with less training
QLoRA quantizes the model during the training process,
data because of the limited expression of the parameters it
since the LoRA parameters for training are of FP16 type,
tunes.
when reasoning, the quantized model is fused with the
These methods are relatively more straightforward to
LoRA parameters, the quantization will be destroyed and
implement. Still, the problem is that we can only deter-
go back to the unquantized form, and then if you want to
mine which part to tune empirically and experimentally,
reasonefficiently,youhavetoperformanotherstepofPTQ
which can be inefficient and inaccurate.In addition, since
(Post-trainingquantization).PTQwillbringextraerrorsand
these methods modify the original model, we also need to
affect the performance of the model. Recently, QALoRA
considertheproblemofmodelforgetting.
[376] solved the problem by introducing group-wise oper-
ators, which realize one-click low-precision deployment of
A.3 Reparameterizationmethods
models.
Thereparameterizationmethodstakeadvantageoflowrank
in the weight matrix of the pre-trained model. Instead of
A.4 Hybridmethods
fine-tuning the entire weight matrix, these methods con-
Combiningthepreviousmethodsisanaturalideatogetbet-
struct smaller fine-tuned modules by reparameterization
ter results. Compacter [379] combines the ideas of Adapter
[374],[375],[376],[377],[378],[379].
and reparameterization to balance the number of trainable
ThemostrepresentativeworkinthisareaisLoRA[374],
parameters, task performance, and memory footprint. The
whichapproximatestheentireweightmatrixbyfine-tuning
above is a brief overview of representative work on PEFT.
thetwo-rankdecompositionmatricesinsteadoffine-tuning
Formoredetailedinformation,see[380].
them.Inthiscase,therankr ofthedecompositionmatrices
PEFTmethodsofferaneffectivewaytotrainmodels,but
is a hyperparameter; the larger r is, the more parameters
it’s still difficult to deploy trained models on edge devices
need to be fine-tuned and the larger the capacity of the
like cell phones. We can tweak the models before compres-
decomposition matrices, and vice versa. Due to the low-
sion, which may affect their performance. Therefore, it’s
rank nature of the pre-trained model’s weight matrix, it is
important to explore new PEFT methods and find ways
generally sufficient for us to set r relatively small, better
tocombine themwithother compressionaccelerationtech-
mitigating the forgetting problem. In addition, when rea-
niques to compress models while minimizing performance
soning, we can merge the decomposition matrix with the
loss in downstream tasks. This remains a valuable area of
weightmatrixtoavoidintroducinginferencedelays.When
research.
switchingtasks,wemustsubtracttheoriginalpartsandadd
newones.
There are two problems with LoRA. The first is that
its size is fixed, which means that once we have set the
rankandtrainedonit,itcannotbemodifiedanymore.The
secondisthatitisdifficulttofindtheoptimalrankunlesswe
perform a search, which is expensive. [377] has developed
a new algorithm called DyLoRA based on LoRA. DyLora